Title: AURORA: Navigating UI Tarpits via Automated Neural Screen Understanding

Abstract: Nearly a decade of research in software engineering has focused on automating mobile app testing to help engineers in overcoming the unique challenges associated with the software platform. Much of this work has come in the form of Automated Input Generation tools (AIG tools) that dynamically explore app screens. However, such tools have repeatedly been demonstrated to achieve lower-than-expected code coverage - particularly on sophisticated proprietary apps. Prior work has illustrated that a primary cause of these coverage deficiencies is related to so-called tarpits, or complex screens that are difficult to navigate.   In this paper, we take a critical step toward enabling AIG tools to effectively navigate tarpits during app exploration through a new form of automated semantic screen understanding. We introduce AURORA, a technique that learns from the visual and textual patterns that exist in mobile app UIs to automatically detect common screen designs and navigate them accordingly. The key idea of AURORA is that there are a finite number of mobile app screen designs, albeit with subtle variations, such that the general patterns of different categories of UI designs can be learned. As such, AURORA employs a multi-modal, neural screen classifier that is able to recognize the most common types of UI screen designs. After recognizing a given screen, it then applies a set of flexible and generalizable heuristics to properly navigate the screen. We evaluated AURORA both on a set of 12 apps with known tarpits from prior work, and on a new set of five of the most popular apps from the Google Play store. Our results indicate that AURORA is able to effectively navigate tarpit screens, outperforming prior approaches that avoid tarpits by 19.6% in terms of method coverage. The improvements can be attributed to AURORA's UI design classification and heuristic navigation techniques.

Body: AURORA: Navigating UI Tarpits via Automated Neural Screen UnderstandingThis work was supported in part by Dragon Testing Technology and NSF grants CCF-1955853 and CCF-2132285. Jiangfan Shi is also with the Institute of Computing Innovation (Zhejiang University), Hangzhou, China. I Introduction II Background II-A Mobile App UI Hierarchies and Frameworks II-B UI Exploration Tarpits and the VET Approach III Deriving Mobile App UI Design Motifs III-A Isolating Structural Screen Patterns with Silhouette Screens III-B Structural Clustering of UI Screens III-C Manual Analysis and Derivation of Design Motifs III-D Identifying Tarpit Screens and Motifs from the VET Dataset III-E Tarpit Screen Analysis IV The Aurora Approach IV-A Approach Workflow IV-B UI Screen Recognizer IV-B 1 Autoencoder-based UI Design Motif Classifier IV-B 2 Transformer-based UI Design Motif Classifier IV-C Heuristics Design V Evaluation V-A Evaluation Context V-B RQ1: Accuracy of Screen Classifiers? V-C RQ2: How often AIG Tools Get Stuck V-D RQ3: Method Coverage Improvement? V-E RQ4: Successful Heuristic Execution? V-F RQ5: Effectiveness of Individual Heuristics VI Threats to Validity VII Related Work VIII Conclusion A URORA : Navigating UI Tarpits via Automated Neural Screen Understanding † † thanks: This work was supported in part by Dragon Testing Technology and NSF grants CCF-1955853 and CCF-2132285. Jiangfan Shi is also with the Institute of Computing Innovation (Zhejiang University), Hangzhou, China. Safwat Ali Khan George Mason University Fairfax, VA, United States skhan89@gmu.edu Wenyu Wang University of Illinois Urbana, IL, United States wenyu2@illinois.edu Yiran Ren Dragon Testing Technology Hangzhou, China renyiran@dragontesting.cn Bin Zhu Dragon Testing Technology Hangzhou, China zhubin@dragontesting.cn Jiangfan Shi Dragon Testing Technology Hangzhou, China shijiangfan@dragontesting.cn Alyssa McGowan Thomas Jefferson High School Alexandria, VA, United States alyssamc38@gmail.com Wing Lam George Mason University Fairfax, VA, United States winglam@gmu.edu Kevin Moran University of Central Florida Orlando, FL, United States kpmoran@ucf.edu Abstract Nearly a decade of research in software engineering has focused on automating mobile app testing to help engineers in overcoming the unique challenges associated with the software platform. Much of this work has come in the form of Automated Input Generation tools (AIG tools) that dynamically explore app screens. However, such tools have repeatedly been demonstrated to achieve lower-than-expected code coverage – particularly on sophisticated proprietary apps. Prior work has illustrated that a primary cause of these coverage deficiencies is related to so-called tarpits , or complex screens that are difficult to navigate. In this paper, we take a critical step toward enabling AIG tools to effectively navigate tarpits during app exploration through a new form of automated semantic screen understanding. That is, we introduce Aurora , a technique that learns from the visual and textual patterns that exist in mobile app UIs to automatically detect common screen designs and navigate them accordingly. The key idea of Aurora is that there are a finite number of mobile app screen designs, albeit with subtle variations, such that the general patterns of different categories of UI designs can be learned . As such, Aurora employs a multi-modal, neural screen classifier that is able to recognize the most common types of UI screen designs. After recognizing a given screen, it then applies a set of flexible and generalizable heuristics to properly navigate the screen. We evaluated Aurora both on a set of 12 apps with known tarpits from prior work, and on a new set of five of the most popular apps from the Google Play store. Our results indicate that Aurora is able to effectively navigate tarpit screens, outperforming prior approaches that avoid tarpits by 19.6% in terms of method coverage. Our analysis of the results finds that the improvements can be attributed to Aurora ’s UI design classification and heuristic navigation techniques. I Introduction Mobile application development (or app development) is a challenging endeavor. Developers working in this domain face a variety of unique challenges that range from rapidly evolving and fault-prone APIs [ 1 , 2 ] to frequent user feedback [ 3 ] and highly competitive app marketplaces [ 4 ] . As such, software maintenance and testing techniques, which are critical to ensuring software quality, are often overlooked due to pressure to deliver features in the face of these external factors [ 5 ] . As such, the research community has worked to provide a range of automated techniques to help developers cope with these challenges, spanning tools that support tasks from bug management [ 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 ] to software evolution [ 17 , 18 ] . In the past decade, an extremely popular area of work in the software engineering research community has aimed to automate software testing for mobile apps – more specifically, GUI-based testing . Given that mobile apps are GUI-centric in nature, UI testing is one of the most popular testing modalities for ensuring the correctness of functionality. However, creating UI tests manually is extremely time-consuming [ 5 ] . As such, the research community has developed numerous Automated Input Generation (AIG) tools that dynamically explore applications with the goals of exercising substantial portions of app functionality, while simultaneously uncovering crashes and other faults. These tools can be broadly grouped into random-based [ 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 ] , model-based [ 25 , 22 , 26 , 20 , 27 , 28 ] , and machine learning-based tools [ 29 , 30 , 31 ] . In controlled experimental settings, AIG tools often perform well and achieve reasonably high code coverage. However, in practice, these AIG tools are often prone to low effectiveness in certain testing scenarios, particularly on sophisticated proprietary apps [ 32 ] . One reason for this low effectiveness is that many proprietary apps often contain complex screens that are difficult for AIG tools to navigate, i.e., the semantics of the screen require a precise order of actions to navigate and bypass so that additional app states can be explored. Wang et al. recently performed a study that empirically illustrated this phenomena, wherein they observed different types of screens that caused AIG tools to halt exploration progress [ 33 ] . The authors of this recent study refer to such screens as UI Exploration Tarpits . In addition to demonstrating this phenomenon, the authors also introduced a preliminary technique for dealing with these tarpit screens, called VET. VET integrates with existing AIG tools and uses a learn-from-mistake strategy that first identifies exploration tarpits from runs of the AIG tool and later disables these screens in future runs of the AIG tool. The VET approach introduced by Wang et al. has two major limitations. First, VET is inherently expensive to run in practice, as it requires running an AIG tool twice, once to detect potential tarpits and then again to explore the app with the tarpits disabled. Second, VET does not assist with navigating UI tarpits, it simply disables them, meaning that there will always be portions of an application’s state that AIG tools enhanced with VET cannot explore. However, navigating through UI tarpits may be feasible (as suggested by the results of the manual analysis performed by Wang et al. [ 33 ] ), exploration tarpits often fall into one of a limited number of categories, even across different apps and AIG tools. This finding suggests that there may be patterns that can be exploited to explore these complex UI tarpit screens. Given the findings and current limitations of prior work, in this paper, we propose a novel technique called Aurora , that aims to effectively navigate tarpit screens during app exploration using a new form of automated semantic screen understanding. The key idea of Aurora is that there are a finite number of UI designs for screens that are likely to represent tarpits, and hence, general design motifs that can be learned will allow for the automated recognition and navigation of such screens. Aurora learns from both the visual and textual patterns present in UI screens to automatically identify tarpit screens, through a component we call the screen recognizer , and then navigates recognized screens using a set of flexible heuristics, via the heuristic navigator component. To better understand UI design categories and their relationship with exploration tarpits, we first studied Android app screenshots and UI hierarchies from the RICO dataset [ 30 ] , deriving a set of 21 mobile app UI Design Motifs , representing coherent design patterns. During this process, multiple authors jointly labeled a minimum of 60 screens exhibiting each of our 21 design motifs, for a dataset totaling 1369 UI screens. We then proceeded to study the correlation between these general categories of UI designs and the tarpit screens as manifested through the dataset of tarpits discovered by and published alongside the VET tool [ 33 ] . We found that eight of our 21 design motifs were identified as tarpits in the VET dataset. This analysis of the relationship between various categories of UI designs and tarpits inspired our design of Aurora . During the app exploration process of an AIG tool, Aurora is able to detect when app exploration progress is hindered by a tarpit, and will then automatically categorize the tarpit screen into one of our identified categories using a neural screen understanding approach that analyzes both the visual patterns in a screenshot of the tarpit and the textual patterns on the UI. For example, Aurora ’s screen recognizer can categorize a given screen as a login screen if the screenshot and UI contain a username and a password EditText , and contain salient visual patterns that indicate the typical structure of a login screen, such as center-aligned text-box(es) and button(s). Aurora ’s screen recognizer is implemented using a multi-modal deep learning model [ 34 ] , which is initialized through self-supervised learning on a set of 6000 app screenshots extracted from an online search engine. It is then trained and tested on an 80-20 split of our labeled dataset of 1369 UI images. Our evaluation finds that Aurora achieved 81.4% classification accuracy. Aurora ’s heuristic navigator implements eight input generation heuristics that aim to intelligently generate sequenced input scenarios to navigate through typical tarpit categories using a combination of neural text matching via transformer-based language models, and dynamic analysis. Aurora is designed to run alongside and enhance existing AIG tools by quickly identifying and navigating through identified exploration tarpits. As an AIG tool is exploring, Aurora will periodically check if the exploration is stuck. If the AIG tool appears to be stuck, Aurora will analyze the current screen to determine if it is a tarpit. If it is, then Aurora will pause the AIG tool and activate a corresponding input generation heuristic to navigate the current screen. We combine Aurora with a state-of-the-art AIG tool, APE [ 21 ] , and test on 17 popular Android apps. We find that Aurora helps improve code coverage substantially, with an average improvement of 11.0% over APE and 19.6% over VET on two separate comparative analyses. Through a qualitative analysis, we observe that these improvements arise due to the effectiveness of Aurora ’s screen recognizer and heuristic navigation strategies – the latter of which exhibits an 88.8% success rate in navigating through UI tarpit screens. Aurora was developed in cooperation with Hangzhou Dragon Testing Technology Co., Ltd. who is focused on building AI-enhanced software testing products, and customers of the company include internationally recognized clients, such as WeChat, a messenger app with over one billion monthly active users. Dragon Testing has deployed a proprietary version of Aurora , that closely mirrors the components and workflow described in this paper, to its automated software testing product offerings. In this context, Aurora has enabled automated navigation of several types of tarpit screens for thousands of automated test cases, including pop-ups and forms, that had previously hindered the testing of app business logic for Dragon Testing’s customers. This deployment of Aurora further illustrates both its effectiveness and practicality. In summary, this paper makes the following contributions: • A Study identifying prevalent design motifs of Android UI screens and the categories that constitute UI exploration tarpits. • A Multi-modal Deep Learning-based Approach for classifying a given UI screen into the design motifs identified in our study. • Automated Heuristics that can be used to navigate prevalent UI tarpits. • A Framework implemented as Aurora [ 35 ] , which can be combined with automated input generation (AIG) tools to automatically categorize screens and apply relevant heuristics to help AIG tools bypass UI tarpits. • An Evaluation on the (1) accurateness of our deep learning model at predicting UI screen categories, (2) effectiveness of our heuristics at bypassing UI tarpits, and (3) code coverage improvements that Aurora can help AIG tools achieve. • Artifacts made publicly available from this work, which includes Aurora and our labeled dataset of UI categories, to help aid future research [ 35 ] . II Background Figure 1 : A visualization of the spatial properties of components captured within Android UI hierarchy of the Imgur [ 36 ] app. II-A Mobile App UI Hierarchies and Frameworks A UI Hierarchy represents the contents of an app UI rendered to the screen of a mobile device. UI hierarchies are comprised of UI elements that each exhibit several properties (e.g., location, size, component type), wherein UI elements are arranged in a hierarchical fashion and children can inherit design and logical properties from their parents. In Android, the ViewServer generates and maintains runtime information about app UIs, and can be queried using the uiautomator framework, which extracts a representation of the UI hierarchy in xml format. Figure 1 illustrates a visualization of the spatial properties of components captured as output in uiautomator xml files. Programmatically, Android screens are primarily made up of constructs called Activities and Fragments , where Activities typically represent a single logical screen and Fragments represent smaller components of a screen, such as a pop-up menu. For the purposes of discussion in this paper, when we refer to a “UI screen”, we are effectively referring to a single Activity or Fragment that is rendered to the UI screen, such as the “Settings Activity” illustrated in Figure 1 . UI hierarchies effectively capture information