Title: Enabling Cost-Effective UI Automation Testing with Retrieval-Based LLMs: A Case Study in WeChat

Abstract: UI automation tests play a crucial role in ensuring the quality of mobile applications. Despite the growing popularity of machine learning techniques to generate these tests, they still face several challenges, such as the mismatch of UI elements. The recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) have addressed these issues by leveraging their semantic understanding capabilities. However, a significant gap remains in applying these models to industrial-level app testing, particularly in terms of cost optimization and knowledge limitation. To address this, we introduce CAT to create cost-effective UI automation tests for industry apps by combining machine learning and LLMs with best practices. Given the task description, CAT employs Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) to source examples of industrial app usage as the few-shot learning context, assisting LLMs in generating the specific sequence of actions. CAT then employs machine learning techniques, with LLMs serving as a complementary optimizer, to map the target element on the UI screen. Our evaluations on the WeChat testing dataset demonstrate the CAT's performance and cost-effectiveness, achieving 90% UI automation with $0.34 cost, outperforming the state-of-the-art. We have also integrated our approach into the real-world WeChat testing platform, demonstrating its usefulness in detecting 141 bugs and enhancing the developers' testing process.

Body: Enabling Cost-Effective UI Automation Testing with Retrieval-Based LLMs: A Case Study in WeChat 1 Introduction 2 Approach 2.1 Task Description Decomposition 2.1.1 Retrieving Few-shot Examples 2.1.2 Generating Decomposed Actions 2.2 UI Automation Execution 2.2.1 UI Element Mapping 2.2.2 LLMs Optimizer 2.3 Implementation 3 Evaluation 3.1 RQ1: Performance of UI Automation 3.2 RQ2: Comparison with State-of-the-Art 3.3 RQ3: Usefulness of CAT 4 Implication and Discussion 5 Related Work 6 Conclusion Enabling Cost-Effective UI Automation Testing with Retrieval-Based LLMs: A Case Study in WeChat Sidong Feng Monash University Melbourne Australia sidong.feng@monash.edu , Haochuan Lu Tencent Inc. Guangzhou China hudsonhclu@tencent.com , Jianqin Jiang Tencent Inc. Guangzhou China janetjiang@tencent.com , Ting Xiong Tencent Inc. Guangzhou China candyxiong@tencent.com , Likun Huang Tencent Inc. Guangzhou China likunhuang@tencent.com , Yinglin Liang Tencent Inc. Guangzhou China dickylliang@tencent.com , Xiaoqin Li Tencent Inc. Guangzhou China allysali@tencent.com , Yuetang Deng Tencent Inc. Guangzhou China yuetangdeng@tencent.com and Aldeida Aleti Monash University Melbourne Australia aldeida.aleti@monash.edu (2024) Abstract. UI automation tests play a crucial role in ensuring the quality of mobile applications. Despite the growing popularity of machine learning techniques to generate these tests, they still face several challenges, such as the mismatch of UI elements. The recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) have addressed these issues by leveraging their semantic understanding capabilities. However, a significant gap remains in applying these models to industrial-level app testing, particularly in terms of cost optimization and knowledge limitation. To address this, we introduce CAT to create cost-effective UI automation tests for industry apps by combining machine learning and LLMs with best practices. Given the task description, CAT employs Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) to source examples of industrial app usage as the few-shot learning context, assisting LLMs in generating the specific sequence of actions. CAT then employs machine learning techniques, with LLMs serving as a complementary optimizer, to map the target element on the UI screen. Our evaluations on the WeChat testing dataset demonstrate the CAT ’s performance and cost-effectiveness, achieving 90% UI automation with $0.34 cost, outperforming the state-of-the-art. We have also integrated our approach into the real-world WeChat testing platform, demonstrating its usefulness in detecting 141 bugs and enhancing the developers’ testing process. UI automation test, large language model, retrieval-augmented generation, cost optimization † † copyright: acmcopyright † † journalyear: 2024 † † copyright: rightsretained † † conference: 39th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering ; October 27-November 1, 2024; Sacramento, CA, USA † † booktitle: 39th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE ’24), October 27-November 1, 2024, Sacramento, CA, USA † † doi: 10.1145/3691620.3695260 † † isbn: 979-8-4007-1248-7/24/10 † † ccs: Software and its engineering Software testing and debugging 1. Introduction Mobile apps have become increasingly popular over the past decade, with millions of apps available for download from app stores like the Apple App Store and Google Play Store. With the rise of app importance in our daily life, it has become increasingly critical for app developers to ensure that their apps are of high quality and perform as expected for users. One common practice for quality assurance is writing UI automation tests, enabling developers to use a pre-defined criterion as the test’s oracle to discover bugs or maximize code coverage. Hardcoding UI automation tests, such as record and replay (Zadgaonkar, 2013 ; Feng et al . , 2023b ) , can quickly become obsolete due to the fast-paced evolution of platforms and the industry’s demand for frequent releases. As a result, industry developers often favor writing UI automation tests with high-level task objectives, such as “sharing a picture with Pony” for regression or performance testing (Choi et al . , 2018 ) . The research community has made substantial contributions toward automating these testing activities. For instance, AppFlow (Hu et al . , 2018 ) introduces a system that leverages test libraries of analogous apps and uses machine learning methods to synthesize UI automation tests. However, existing machine learning techniques in this field often face practical adoption challenges (Feng et al . , 2024 ) , particularly the issues of mismatched UI elements, which undermine the effectiveness of UI automation tests. Large Language Models (LLMs) pave the way for numerous software development tasks, including UI automation. A recent success in this field is AdbGPT (Feng and Chen, 2024 ) , which uses prompt engineering to extract semantic understanding and logical reasoning from LLMs, significantly improving the performance of UI automation tests. Yet, applying LLMs for UI automation tests in the industry involves two main challenges, in terms of cost optimization and knowledge integration. First, while numerous studies (Feng and Chen, 2024 ; Feng et al . , 2024 ) focus on utilizing LLMs for UI automation tests, the associated costs can be prohibitive for industry-level testing. Even with the deployment of a private LLM service, the computational cost remains high. For instance, inferring a single token with LLaMA-7B (Touvron et al . , 2023 ) requires 6.7 billion FLOPs, and the entire UI automation process may use over millions of tokens. Second, LLMs often lack specific knowledge and experience regarding industrial apps, which can lead to ineffective UI automation. This is primarily due to the potential license copyright violations from the LLMs (web, 2024c ) , which prevent the inclusion of industry resources in the training. In this paper, we propose CAT , designed to facilitate C ost-effective UI A utomation T ests for industrial apps. This is achieved by integrating well-established machine learning methods with cutting-edge advancements in LLMs. CAT operates in two phases: i) Task Description Decomposition and ii) UI Automation Execution . When presented with a task description, the first phase is to break down it into a specific sequence of executable actions. Given the limited knowledge of industrial apps, we aim to provide one example to aid LLMs in comprehending the app usage and abstracting task description decomposition. As a result, we leverage the Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) method, which performs neural searches across previous app testing datasets to select the most analogous examples as the few-shot learning context, encouraging the LLMs to formulate possible actions. Once the actions are determined, the second phase is to automatically execute them on the device by associating them with the UI element mapping. To accomplish this, we propose a machine learning method, with the LLMs serving as a complementary optimizer, to map the UI element on the screen. To evaluate the performance of the CAT , we carry out a large-scale experiment involving 39k tasks in the WeChat dataset. First, we conduct an ablation study to assess the performance of the CAT in UI automation, using five variations of the approach. The results show that CAT significantly increases the completion rate at a reduced cost, successfully completing 90% of the tasks at an average cost of $0.34. Second, we evaluate the performance of the CAT against two state-of-the-art UI automation methods. Our findings reveal that our approach can save more cost and time without sacrificing the completion rate, saving $1,467 cost even when compared to the best baseline. Beyond the performance of the approach, we also evaluate its practical usefulness. We integrate the CAT with the WeChat testing platform, triggering it whenever new functionalities need testing or a new version is released, accompanied by new task descriptions. During the testing period from December 2023 to June 2024, CAT automatically executes 6k of UI automation tests, detecting 141 bugs. This alleviates the developers’ burden in bug detection, saving substantial time for subsequent bug fixing. The contributions of this paper are as follows: • We present CAT , a novel approach that combines machine learning and large language models with the adoption of best practices to generate UI automation tests. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that contemplates cost optimization and knowledge integration of LLMs in industrial-level app testing. • We conduct extensive experiments, including ablation studies and comparisons with state-of-the-art methods, to showcase the performance and cost-effectiveness of CAT . Additionally, we incorporate our approach into a real-world testing platform to illustrate its practical usefulness. 2. Approach Given a high-level task description, we propose an automated approach to break down the actions and execute them on the dynamic UI to trigger the app activity for testing. The overview of our approach CAT is shown in Figure 1 , which is divided into two main phases: (i) the Task Description Decomposition phase, which decomposes task description into multiple potential action steps, including action types, target elements, and input values; (ii) the UI Automation Execution phase which aligns the actions with the dynamic UI elements to accomplish UI automation. Figure 1. The overview of our approach. 2.1. Task Description Decomposition The first phase of our approach is to understand, analyze, organize, and generate the actions from the high-level task description by using the advance of LLMs. Given the potential knowledge gap in LLMs regarding the specifics of industrial app usage, we adopt the widely recognized Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) technique. It first employs a machine learning mechanism to retrieve a few examples detailing the inputs and outputs associated with industrial app usage. Then, these examples serve as a context for few-shot learning, assisting the LLMs in generating potential actions for the task description. 2.1.1. Retrieving Few-shot Examples A representative example helps the model in eliciting specific knowledge and abstractions. A randomly chosen example might not capture the intricacies of industrial app usage, thereby limiting the LLMs’ ability to fully comprehend the task. To address this, we utilize examples from previous app testing datasets, a common industry practice for testing app functionalities across iterative versions. The dataset usually comprises testing objectives with high-level task descriptions and their specific sequence of steps. Consequently, we apply a neural search and a similarity-based retrieval technique to select representative examples from the dataset. First, we utilize the transformer encoder model T5 (Raffel et al . , 2020 ) to encode the descriptions into a vector space. This allows for the handling of variable-sized inputs: when an input sequence is provided, it is mapped to a sequence of embeddings that are then passed into the encoder. All encoders share an identical structure, each consisting of two subcomponents: a self-attention layer followed by a compact feed-forward network. Layer normalization is applied to each subcomponent’s input, while a residual skip connection adds each subcomponent’s input to its output. Dropout is implemented within the feed-forward network, on the skip connection, on the attention weights, and at the input and output of the entire stack. Based on the vectors, we employ the sparse retrieval method known as cosine similarity (Singhal et al . , 2001 ) , to identify representative examples that align closely with the testing task description, as indicated by the highest relevance score. In detail, it is measured as: c ⁢ o ⁢ s ⁢ ( v 1 , v 2 ) = v 1 ⁢ v 2 | v 1 | ⁢ | v 2 | 𝑐 𝑜 𝑠 subscript 𝑣 1 subscript 𝑣 2 subscript 𝑣 1 subscript 𝑣 2 subscript 𝑣 1 subscript 𝑣 2 cos(v_{1},v_{2})=\frac{v_{1}v_{2}}{\left|v_{1}\right|\left|v_{2}\right|} italic_c italic_o italic_s ( italic_v start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_v start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) = divide start_ARG italic_v start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_v start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG start_ARG | italic_v start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT | | italic_v start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT | end_ARG , where v 1 ⁢ v 2 subscript 𝑣 1 subscript 𝑣 2 v_{1}v_{2} italic_v start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_v start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT is the inner product of two vectors and | v 1 | ⁢ | v 2 | subscript 𝑣 1 subscript 𝑣 2 \left|v_{1}\right|\left|v_{2}\right| | italic_v start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT | | italic_v start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT | is the product of 2-norm for these vectors. Table 1. Prompt example for task description decomposition. COMPONENT DETAILS ⟨Instructions⟩ I want you to act as a professional developer. I expect you to analyze the task description I provide and respond with potential actions that could interact with the device. Please enumerate these actions and encapsulate the operations within brackets [like this]. ⟨One-shot Example⟩ Here is an example: Task description -¿ “open settings” Actions -¿ 1. [tap] [me] 2. [tap] [settings] … ⟨Testing Task Description⟩ Here is the testing task: Task description -¿ “change username to TEST” Actions -¿ 2.1.2. Generating Decomposed Actions A LLMs prompt example to generate potential actions for task description is shown in Table 1 , including ⟨Instructions⟩ + ⟨One-shot Example⟩ + ⟨Testing Task Description⟩ . Specifically, we first instruct the LLMs to outline the objective goal, which is to dissect the task description into the potential sequence of actions. According to a small pilot study, we retrieve the top-1 representative examples for few-shot learning (as known as one-shot learning), aiding in the recognition of industrial app usage and output patterns. Next, we present the testing task description as the test prompt and ask for the decomposed actions. Due to the advantage of instruction prompting and few-shot learning, the LLMs will consistently generate a numeric list to represent the sequence of actions in the same format as our example output, which can be inferred using regular expressions. 2.2. UI Automation Execution The second phase involves matching the decomposed actions with the UI elements to automate execution. A common approach is to use lexical computation to match the displayed text of the elements on the current UI screen. However, there may be mismatches with the target element due to the dynamic nature of the UI screen. For instance, “sharing a moment” might be synthesized into a “moment A” element due to previous app usage, while the current el