Title: A comprehensive study of on-device NLP applications -- VQA, automated Form filling, Smart Replies for Linguistic Codeswitching

Abstract: Recent improvement in large language models, open doors for certain new experiences for on-device applications which were not possible before. In this work, we propose 3 such new experiences in 2 categories. First we discuss experiences which can be powered in screen understanding i.e. understanding whats on user screen namely - (1) visual question answering, and (2) automated form filling based on previous screen. The second category of experience which can be extended are smart replies to support for multilingual speakers with code-switching. Code-switching occurs when a speaker alternates between two or more languages. To the best of our knowledge, this is first such work to propose these tasks and solutions to each of them, to bridge the gap between latest research and real world impact of the research in on-device applications.

Body: A comprehensive study of on-device NLP applications - VQA, automated Form filling, Smart Replies for Linguistic Codeswitching 1 Introduction 2 Screen Understanding 2.1 Introduction 2.2 Related Work 2.3 Tasks 3 Visual Question Answering for on screen context 3.1 Data and Challenge 3.2 Training Pipeline 3.3 Question Types title phone number email url address ’DateTime’ 3.4 Observations Observation 1 Possible Reasons Observation 2 Possible Reason Observation 3 Possible Reason 3.5 Results 3.6 Limitations 3.7 Future Directions 4 Automated form filling using previous on screen context 4.1 Data and challenge 4.2 Pipeline 4.3 Results Observation 1 Possible Reason Observation 2 Possible Reason 4.4 Limitations 5 Smart Replies 5.1 Introduction 5.2 Related Work 5.3 Tasks 6 Suggesting smart replies for multilingual speakers with code switching 6.1 Code-Switch Data 6.2 Code-switch Smart Replies model 6.3 Results 6.4 Future Directions 7 Conclusion A comprehensive study of on-device NLP applications - VQA, automated Form filling, Smart Replies for Linguistic Codeswitching Naman Goyal Columbia University ng2848@columbia.edu Abstract Recent improvement in large language models, open doors for certain new experiences for on-device applications which were not possible before. In this work, we propose 3 such new experiences in 2 categories. First we discuss experiences which can be powered in screen understanding i.e. understanding whats on user screen namely - (1) visual question answering, and (2) automated form filling based on previous screen. The second category of experience which can be extended are smart replies to support for multilingual speakers with code-switching. Code-switching occurs when a speaker alternates between two or more languages. To the best of our knowledge, this is first such work to propose these tasks and solutions to each of them, to bridge the gap between latest research and real world impact of the research in on-device applications. 1 Introduction Recent advancements in large language models in Document AI (Xu et al., 2020 ; Li et al., 2021 ) , Dialogue Generation (Peng et al., 2022 ) , information extraction opens doors to much powerful and useful experiences on device application, much better than existing solutions. Currently the 2 main applications of NLP on a device are (1) digital assistants and (2) automated smart replies. This work gives a comprehensive idea of newer experiences which can be supported on a mobile device to ease user lives. The first such experience are related to on-device screen understanding. The latest research on layout based understanding of screen content and help power newer capabilities on device including VQA, smarter form filling and information sharing and better accessibility usage for visually challenged users. The second experience, is extending the capability of smart replies systems. Smart replies refers to automatically generating shorter responses for an incoming email or an ongoing conversation which a user assists with quicker response in a large number of scenarios. The current research in this domain is similar to dialogue generation, but the current responses are much more generic and only applicable in highly formal and limited languages setting. This works discusses new applications for smart replies (1) smart replies for users with linguistic code switching (2) personalized smart reply generation based on learning knowledge about a user from the conversation history In linguistics, code-switching or language alternation occurs when a speaker alternates between two or more languages, or language varieties, in the context of a single conversation or situation. Multilingual (speakers of more than one language) sometimes use elements of multiple languages when conversing with each other. Thus, code-switching is the use of more than one linguistic variety in a manner consistent with the syntax and phonology of each variety. The current challenges in the proposed space is lack of datasets and evaluation benchmarks for the newly proposed experiences including but not limited to, on-device screen understanding for form filling, smart replies for users with linguistic code switching, and personalized smart reply generation based on external grounded knowledge. Constructing such datasets requires large scale collections from user habits and special annotations for the task, and then coming up with good evaluation benchmarks for the tasks, This is the first work which discusses such newer experiences and then proposes solutions based on the current research. The notable contributions being - 1. Proposal of screen based understanding for Visual Question answering 2. Proposal of screen based understanding for in-form filling tasks. 3. Proposal of smart replies for code switching for multilingual speakers. 2 Screen Understanding 2.1 Introduction Screen understanding is modelled as understanding the input screen image and associated text on the screen. It is a multimodal learning task. Recently, there has been recently a lot of progress in Document AI for work related to document understanding. If we model an input app view as document, we can use the recent techniques in document AI. Document AI refers to given a input document, techniques for automatically (1) reading, (2) understanding, (3) analyzing it. It’s a challenging task due to the diversity of layouts and formats, inferior quality of scanned document images complexity of template structures. For rest of the discussion we will consider an app view (the screenshot + screen text) as an document. 2.2 Related Work Figure 1: Families of Document AI model based on information There are 2 families of models proposed - LayoutLM (Huang et al., 2022 ) and MarkupLM (Li et al., 2021 ) as seen in figure 1 . The LayoutLM family used a rendered image and the document text to extract the answer. More useful for PDFs which are rendered the same irrespective of the viewing device. MarkupLM family uses the idea that the same HTML document could be rendered in different ways based on viewport screen size. Hence to generate they use XPath (XML Path Language) which is directly extracted from the view hierarchy. The main idea for LayoutLM family is to do multiple pretraining tasks which closely align the image and text level tokens. For the latest LayoutLMv3 shown in figure 6 , we take word level feature as token, divide Image as patch and project in latent sapce and append them to text. Then we do 3 level of pretraining 1. Mask Language Modelling with text token 2. Mask Image Modelling with Image token - reconstruct masked image patches, target tokens latent codes from a discrete VAE 3. Word Patch Alignment - predict from some text token if corresponding image patch is unmasked 2.3 Tasks We next discuss the 2 task in screen understanding. To best of our knowledge this is the first work done to propose such tasks in Screen Understanding. 1. Visual Question Answering for on screen context 2. Automated form filling using previous on screen context 3 Visual Question Answering for on screen context The task for visual question answering is to build a system which can answer questions based on information present on the screen. It is an extractive question answering task. Figure 2: VQA task Problem statement: Build a system which can answer a natural language query from a given app view (screenshot + text). E.g. Question (input): When is the daily show? Answer (output): 7:45pm and 8:45pm Specifically for a given screen view we need to understand the following to answer a question - 1. ’form’ - information is in the form as key:value 2. ’Layout’ - require spatial/layout information like title, heading 3. ’table/list’ - question requires understanding of a table or a list 3.1 Data and Challenge The issue with building a system which works for Visual Question Answering should work for the large variety of apps on appstore. Hence we need need lot of diverse screenshots. We internally collected data from 100,000+ screens from more than 4,500 top-downloaded iOS apps. But the challenge was this was unlabelled i.e. we need correct question, answer pair for a given app view, which we didn’t have. To solve this issue we used a 2 step solution. First, we leveraged a rule based system which given an input app view could extract specific data types like date, time, url,address, title (aka values) via rules, as shown in figure 3 . Figure 3: Label generation step 1 via extracting predefined data types (aka values) Second, we then found the nearest parent text element that can be approximate as the key for extracted value. Now we can phrase questions in the following format Question: what is this key? Answer: value See figure 4 where we could extract 2 addresses and then had 2 questions in training data. Figure 4: Step 2 of label generation, finding nearest parent text element, and frames questions based on the same. Here we could extract 2 addresses and then had 2 questions in training data. Question 1: what is the fremont address? Answer: 5355 Mowry Ave, Fremont, CA 94538 Question 2: what is the sunnyvale address? Answer: 976 East El Camino Real, Sunnyvale, CA 94087 3.2 Training Pipeline Our training methodology had 4 stages. 1. We start with the LayoutLMv3 model which has been pre-trained on a large amount of open source scanned documents. 2. Add Question answering (QA) head on top LayoutLMv3. The model is then trained on DocVQA dataset. 3. Generate weak labels (question answer pairs) using Rule based system on the top apps dataset. to form a for training 4. Finetune on internal apps dataset using incremental learning. We use DocVQA (Mathew et al., 2021 ) dataset to initialize QA head, because the question answer set of DocVQA is very close to our internal apps dataset training. Further DocVQA labels are clean and gold standard, while our labels are noisy. Figure 5: Training pipeline (1) Start with the pretraining task of layoutLMv3 (2) Add Question answering (QA) head on top LayoutLMv3 (3) Initialize training of QA head on DocVQA dataset (4) Finetune on weak label generated internal apps dataset using incremental learning. Figure 6: The architecture and pre-training objectives of LayoutLMv3. LayoutLMv3 is a pre-trained multimodal Transformer for Document AI with unified text and image masking objectives. Given an input document image and its corresponding text and layout position information, the model takes the linear projection of patches and word tokens as inputs and encodes them into contextualized vector representations. LayoutLMv3 is pre-trained with discrete token reconstructive objectives of Masked Language Modeling (MLM) and Masked Image Modeling (MIM). Additionally, LayoutLMv3 is pre-trained with a Word-Patch Alignment (WPA) objective to learn cross-modal alignment by predicting whether the corresponding image patch of a text word is masked. “Seg” denotes segment-level positions. “[CLS]”, “[MASK]”, “[SEP]” and “[SPE]” are special tokens. 3.3 Question Types The following 6 types of questions were generated using the weak labelling procedure described earlier on tops apps dataset used for final training. Note if we found that a value has an associated key, we used the key as in forming question by replacing {} with the key. We call these questions keyed questions as highlighted in blue. Two examples of keyed questions are shown in figure 4 title ”What is the document about?”, ”What is the title?”, ”What is it about?” phone number ”What is the phone number?”, ”What is the number?” ”What is the {} phone number?”, ”What is the {} number?” email ”What is the email?”, ”What is the email address?” ”What is the {} email?”, ”What is the {} email address?” url ”What is the url?”, ”What is the link?” ”What is the {} url?”, ”What is the {} link?” address ”What is the address?”, ”What is the location?” ”What is the {} address?”, ”What is the {} location?” ’DateTime’ ”What is the date?”, ”What is the time?”, ”When is it?” ”When is the {} ?”, ”What time is {} scheduled?”, ”When is {} scheduled?”, ”What date is {} scheduled?” 3.4 Observations We now analyze the fine-tuning on our top apps dataset starting from DocVQA checkpoint. We observe the following trends. Observation 1 The validation loss hasn’t dropped much even though train loss has decreased. Similarly validation f1 hasn’t increased much over training. Figure 7: Overall loss curve while fine-tuning on the tops apps dataset starting from the DocVQA train checkpoint. Figure 8: Overall metrics f1 and recall while fine-tuning on the tops apps dataset starting from the DocVQA train checkpoint. Possible Reasons 1. We start fine tuning the model from the trained checkpoint of DocVQA database (50,000 questions defined on 12,000+ document images) which is already a good starting point. 2. The dataset we used for fine tuning has fews issue - the bounding boxes are not too tight and spill to other text regions as shown in figure 9 . Also there are ghost bounding boxes for text in the fine tuning dataset which are not visible to users on screen, thereby confusing the model. Figure 9: An example of issue present in tops apps dataset where the input bounding boxes are not so tight. Observation 2 The validation f1 for title has improved marginally from 98.8 to 99.4. Possible Reason The DocVQA dataset has around 500 samples for title, while majority of our train samples were title. This can be estimated from validation data which has 1379 samples for title, validation and train data follow same distribution. Figure 10: The validation f1 for title has improved marginally from 98.8 to 99.4. Observation 3 The validation f1 for date has even fact dropped after our training from 50 to 42. Possible Reason The DocVQA dataset has over 4,500 samples for date, while we had only very limited datetime samples in training. This can be estimated from validation data which has 61 samples for datetime, validation and train data follow same distribution. Figure 11: The validation f1 for date has even fact dropped after our training from 50 to 42. 3.5 Results Below we show 4 examples in figures 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 Each example highlights a particular challenge the model is able to solve without being explicitly trained on those samples. Examples include 1. Understand natural query and do structure based association in the cab example. 2. Work on generic new data types like length. 3. Do robust entity association in a list shown in the car race schedule example. 4. Understand tables 3.6 Limitations The following limitations were noticed while working on the model 1. The proposed model can’t understand and reason about images. The model LayoutLM can understand the structure and layout but it can’t reason nor understand if there is an image of a dog. This is because understanding the image was not part of its training objective, nor does it have any image-based backbone? 2. The model doesn’t do intent classification of query (e.g