Title: AutoDroid-V2: Boosting SLM-based GUI Agents via Code Generation

Abstract: Large language models (LLMs) have brought exciting new advances to mobile UI agents, a long-standing research field that aims to complete arbitrary natural language tasks through mobile UI interactions. However, existing UI agents usually demand powerful large language models that are difficult to be deployed locally on end-users' devices, raising huge concerns about user privacy and centralized serving cost. Inspired by the remarkable coding abilities of recent small language models (SLMs), we propose to convert the UI task automation problem to a code generation problem, which can be effectively solved by an on-device SLM and efficiently executed with an on-device code interpreter. Unlike normal coding tasks that can be extensively pre-trained with public datasets, generating UI automation code is challenging due to the diversity, complexity, and variability of target apps. Therefore, we adopt a document-centered approach that automatically builds fine-grained API documentation for each app and generates diverse task samples based on this documentation. By guiding the agent with the synthetic documents and task samples, it learns to generate precise and efficient scripts to complete unseen tasks. Based on detailed comparisons with state-of-the-art mobile UI agents, our approach effectively improves the mobile task automation with significantly higher success rates and lower latency/token consumption. Code is open-sourced at https://github.com/MobileLLM/AutoDroid-V2.

Body: AutoDroid-V2: Boosting SLM-based GUI Agents via Code Generation 1 Introduction 2 Related Work and Motivation 2.1 GUI-based Mobile Task Automation 2.2 Related Works 2.3 Script-based GUI Agents: Opportunities and Challenges 3 Our Approach: AutoDroid-V2 3.1 Automated App Document Generation 3.1.1 Functionality-aware GUI States Grouping 3.1.2 Abstract GUI Elements 3.1.3 Forward and Backward Dependency 3.2 Data Synthesis for SLM Customization 3.2.1 Large-scale Task Solution Generation 3.2.2 Validation-based Script Revising. 3.2.3 Tree-based Script Quality Improvement 3.3 Script-based Runtime Task Execution 3.3.1 Runtime Dynamicity Handling 3.3.2 Enhancing Efficiency with Prompt Compression and Reuse 4 Evaluation 4.1 Experimental Setup 4.2 Success Rate and Redundancy 4.2.1 DroidTask 4.2.2 AitW 4.3 Latency and Cost 4.4 Fine-grained Performance Analysis 4.4.1 Performance with Different LLMs 4.4.2 Impact of Script Validation 5 Discussion 6 Conclusion AutoDroid-V2: Boosting SLM-based GUI Agents via Code Generation Hao Wen 1 , Shizuo Tian 1 , Borislav Pavlov 1 , Wenjie Du 1,∗ , Yixuan Li 1,∗ , Ge Chang 1,∗ , Shanhui Zhao 1,∗ , Jiacheng Liu 1,∗ , Yunxin Liu 1,2 , Ya-Qin Zhang 1 , Yuanchun Li 1,2,3,† 1 Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 3 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI) (2025) Abstract. Large language models (LLMs) have brought exciting new advances to mobile UI agents, a long-standing research field that aims to complete arbitrary natural language tasks through mobile UI interactions. However, existing UI agents usually demand powerful large language models that are difficult to be deployed locally on end-users’ devices, raising huge concerns about user privacy and centralized serving cost. Inspired by the remarkable coding abilities of recent small language models (SLMs), we propose to convert the UI task automation problem to a code generation problem, which can be effectively solved by an on-device SLM and efficiently executed with an on-device code interpreter. Unlike normal coding tasks that can be extensively pre-trained with public datasets, generating UI automation code is challenging due to the diversity, complexity, and variability of target apps. Therefore, we adopt a document-centered approach that automatically builds fine-grained API documentation for each app and generates diverse task samples based on this documentation. By guiding the agent with the synthetic documents and task samples, it learns to generate precise and efficient scripts to complete unseen tasks. Based on detailed comparisons with state-of-the-art mobile UI agents, our approach effectively improves the mobile task automation with significantly higher success rates and lower latency/token consumption. Code is open-sourced at https://github.com/MobileLLM/AutoDroid-V2 . Mobile UI Agent, Small Language Models, Mobile Task Automation, Script Generation † † \dagger † Corresponding author: Yuanchun Li (liyuanchun@air.tsinghua.edu.cn). * Work done during internships at AIR, Tsinghua University. † † submissionid: #128 † † journalyear: 2025 † † conference: The 23rd Annual International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications and Services; June 23–27, 2025; Anaheim, CA, USA † † booktitle: The 23rd Annual International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications and Services (MobiSys ’25), June 23–27, 2025, Anaheim, CA, USA † † doi: 10.1145/3711875.3729134 † † isbn: 979-8-4007-1453-5/25/06 † † ccs: Human-centered computing Ubiquitous and mobile computing † † ccs: Computing methodologies Artificial intelligence 1. Introduction Automating the control of mobile devices through natural language has long been a goal for mobile developers and researchers (Bolt, 1980 ; Azim et al . , 2016 ; Li et al . , 2024 ) . Agents powered by Large Language Models (LLM) and Vision Language Models (VLM, both LLM and VLM are refered as LLM for simplicity in this paper) have emerged as promising solutions for automating flexible and complex user tasks (Yuan et al . , 2024 ; Wen et al . , 2024 ; You et al . , 2024 ; Wang et al . , 2024c ; Lee et al . , 2023 ; Liu et al . , 2024 ; Zhang et al . , 2024a ) . These agents function by interpreting user instructions, analyzing the graphical user interface (GUI) states, and predicting UI actions (e.g., touch, scroll, input text, etc.) to be performed in the target apps iteratively. Most of these LLM-based GUI agents operate in a step-by-step manner, i . e . querying the LLM at each GUI state for dynamic decision and reflection. They typically include the user’s task and the observed GUI state (e.g., a screenshot or a text-based view hierarchy) in the LLM prompt, requesting the model to generate the required UI action. This iterative process continues until the task is completed. For this reason, we refer to these conventional designs as “Step-wise GUI agents” in this paper. While step-wise GUI agents hold great potential, they mostly rely on powerful reasoning and reflection abilities, which are dominated by large cloud-based models ( e . g . GPT-4o, Claude, etc.). Due to the high computational cost and/or closed-source nature of these models, they can hardly be deployed to mobile devices. This situation can lead to significant privacy and security risks of sharing each personal GUI page to the cloud (Zhang et al . , 2024d ; Ma et al . , 2024 ; Zhang et al . , 2024e ) , high user-side traffic consumption, and high server-side centralized serving costs, hindering large-scale deployment of GUI agents. Among the possible countermeasures to this problem, small language models (SLMs) (There is no clear boundary between LLM and SLM. In this paper, we use SLM to represent the LLMs that can be deployed on the device.) and efficient inference systems have emerged as promising directions to enable on-device deployment of more powerful models (Van Nguyen et al . , 2024 ; Xu et al . , 2024 ; Lu et al . , 2024 ) . The current capabilities of these SLMs are still far from their cloud-based counterparts, and the capability gap is anticipated to remain in the near future due to the scaling laws (Kaplan et al . , 2020 ) . Customizing a domain-specific SLM can also be a potential solution. However, training a domain-specific model requires a large-scale, high-quality labeled dataset covering diverse usage scenarios, which are difficult to obtain in the UI task automation domain. Most existing mobile task automation datasets (Burns et al . , 2022 ; Zhang et al . , 2024c ; Rawles et al . , 2024 ; Sun et al . , 2022 ) only have hundreds of human demonstrations. The largest dataset AitW (Rawles et al . , 2023 ) has 715k crowd-sourced task demonstrations, while the quality is low for most demonstrations (we compare the agents trained with such datasets in Section 4.2 ). Meanwhile, the LLM abilities used in existing GUI agents are diverse, including not only simple GUI grounding abilities that can be offered by a small tailored model (Cheng et al . , 2024 ; Hong et al . , 2024 ; Gou et al . , 2024 ) , but also general reasoning and reflection abilities that can hardly be distilled to a much smaller model (Zhang et al . , 2024a ; Wang et al . , 2024b ; Bishop et al . , 2024 ) . Here, we argue that the widely adopted step-wise mechanism of GUI agents may need to be changed in order to accommodate the requirements of practical on-device agents. First, step-wise decision-making requires high and frequent reasoning and reflection about the current state and progress, which are essentially challenging for SLMs. Second, even if the step-wise decisions can be made with reasonable accuracy, calling the model at each step is very compute-intensive, making it difficult to provide a smooth user experience with limited on-device computational resources. Fortunately, we observe that SLMs can be trained to have a unique but important strength in coding , i . e . producing executable code based on user instructions (Gunasekar et al . , 2023 ; Roziere et al . , 2023 ; Zhu et al . , 2024 ) . This strength is largely attributed to extensive training on code datasets (Dubey et al . , 2024 ; Jiang et al . , 2024a ) , as it is relatively easier to collect large-scale, high-quality source code data compared to many other types of data. Remarkably, some on-device SLMs now achieve accuracy levels comparable to closed-source LLMs (Zhu et al . , 2024 ) . This raises an interesting question: could the step-wise decision-making problem in GUI task automation be reframed as a code generation problem to better leverage the capability of on-device SLMs? Figure 1 . Comparison of conventional step-wise GUI agent and our script-based GUI agent. The step-wise GUI agent includes the user’s task and the current GUI state in the LLM prompt ( Q ⁢ 1 , … ⁢ Q ⁢ n 𝑄 1 … 𝑄 𝑛 Q1,\dots Qn italic_Q 1 , … italic_Q italic_n ), asking the model to generate a GUI action for each step ( A ⁢ 1 , … ⁢ A ⁢ n 𝐴 1 … 𝐴 𝑛 A1,\dots An italic_A 1 , … italic_A italic_n ). The script-based agent inputs the task and app document ( Q 𝑄 Q italic_Q ), prompting the LLM to generate a multi-step script for execution. To this end, we introduce AutoDroid-V2 to investigate how to build a powerful GUI agent upon the coding capabilities of SLMs . The key difference of AutoDroid-V2 is to complete GUI tasks by generating and executing multi-step scripts based on user instructions, rather than deciding one action at a time. We refer to this approach as the “Script-based GUI Agent” , which largely differs from traditional step-wise GUI agents, as illustrated in Figure 1 . Such a script-based agent can effectively address the aforementioned two problems of step-wise approaches: (1) Efficiency: Agents can generate a single script for a series of GUI actions to complete a task based on the user task, significantly reducing query frequency and consumption. (2) Capability: Script-based GUI agents rely primarily on the coding ability of SLMs, which have been proven effective by numerous existing studies on lightweight coding assistants. A natural question that may be raised for script-based GUI task automation is why it is feasible to generate accurate scripts before knowing the actual situation at each runtime step. Conceptually, each app, although it may be very complicated, can be viewed as a finite state machine, where the number of states is predetermined in the app development stage. Thus, in principle, a human or AI with full information about the state machine is able to complete tasks without observing each state. Practically, realizing AutoDroid-V2 requires to further address two challenges. (1) Understanding GUI elements : It is necessary - but challenging - for LLMs to understand all GUI elements and their functions within an app to generate an accurate script. This difficulty arises from the complexity of mobile apps, which often involve numerous GUI states, each featuring over 100 GUI elements (e.g., buttons, icons, inputs) organized in a hierarchical structure, as well as complex transition relationships between GUI states. (2) Dynamic Nature of Mobile apps : Many GUI states and GUI elements can change in text, location, or size ( e . g . contact names, note titles, dates). As a result, the generated script may become non-executable if a GUI element changes and cannot be located, due to the dynamic nature of GUI elements. AutoDroid-V2 addresses these challenges by automatically generating a fine-grained yet concise app document, which guides agents in generating precise multi-step code to interact with UI elements and complete user tasks. The method consists of two stages: UI-Centric App Documentation and Document-Guided Code Generation. The UI-Centric App Documentation stage is responsible for analyzing the UI functionalities based on random exploring histories and recording the interactive elements. The Document-Guided Code Generation stage automatically generates code to interact with GUI elements, leveraging a domain-specific language (DSL) to efficiently handle runtime dynamicity. We evaluate AutoDroid-V2 in two benchmarks with real execution environments and a total number of 226 tasks across 23 mobile apps, in comparison with strong baselines including AutoDroid (Wen et al . , 2024 ) , SeeClick (Cheng et al . , 2024 ) , CogAgent (Hong et al . , 2024 ) , and Mind2Web (Deng et al . , 2024 ) . The results demonstrate that AutoDroid-V2 can effectively enhance the accuracy and efficiency of on-device GUI agents, achieving 10.5%-51.7% higher task completion rate than baselines, reducing runtime input and output token consumption by 43.5x and 5.8x, reducing LLM inference latency by 5.7-13.4× compared to baselines. Our work makes the following technical contributions: (1) We introduce the first GUI agent driven by document-guided multi-step program generation, presenting a promising solution combining the remarkable coding capabilities of SLMs and efficient code-based task execution. (2) We introduce a scalable automated app document generation method that can compress UI information from an app exploring history, as well as an interpreter that ensures reliable and efficient script execution. (3) We conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness of our approach, offering insights into the advantages and limitations of our script-based GUI agents and existing step-wise approaches. 2. Related Work and Motivation 2.1. GUI-based Mobile Task Automation The goal of mobile task automation is to automatically complete user tasks by interacting with mobile devices. A GUI-based task automation agent takes a natural language task related to a mobile app and outputs a sequence of GUI actions executable on a smartphone. A task is a multi-step functionality request from the user intended for completion on a smartphone, often lacking explicit instructions. A GUI State reflects the current status or condition of the user interface in the app, usually structured as a GUI tree of controls represented by images and text. A GUI element is a control in the GUI state that human users can interact with, such as a button, a text box, an input field, and a slider. A GUI action , performable by the user or an agent on the device screen, is defined by (GUI element, action). Action represents how the target GUI element is manipulated, including “click”, “long click”, “input ¡text¿”, and “swipe ¡direction¿”. 2.2. Related Works LLM-based GUI Agents. With the rise of large foundation models, there has been a trend leveraging LLMs (Zhang et al . , 2024b ; Wen et al . , 2023 , 2024 ; Lee et al . , 2024 ; Zhang et al . , 2023b ) and Vision Language Models (VLMs) (Zhang and Zhang, 2024 ; Yan et al . , 2023 ; Zhang et al . , 2023a ) to guide mobile task automation. These models enable more flexible and scalable task automation, typically executing tasks in a step-wise manner. Some research efforts focus on code generation for web page task