Title: SeeAction: Towards Reverse Engineering How-What-Where of HCI Actions from Screencasts for UI Automation

Abstract: UI automation is a useful technique for UI testing, bug reproduction, and robotic process automation. Recording user actions with an application assists rapid development of UI automation scripts, but existing recording techniques are intrusive, rely on OS or GUI framework accessibility support, or assume specific app implementations. Reverse engineering user actions from screencasts is non-intrusive, but a key reverse-engineering step is currently missing - recognizing human-understandable structured user actions ([command] [widget] [location]) from action screencasts. To fill the gap, we propose a deep learning-based computer vision model that can recognize 11 commands and 11 widgets, and generate location phrases from action screencasts, through joint learning and multi-task learning. We label a large dataset with 7260 video-action pairs, which record user interactions with Word, Zoom, Firefox, Photoshop, and Windows 10 Settings. Through extensive experiments, we confirm the effectiveness and generality of our model, and demonstrate the usefulness of a screencast-to-action-script tool built upon our model for bug reproduction.

Body: SeeAction: Towards Reverse Engineering How-What-Where of HCI Actions from Screencasts for UI Automation I Introduction II Approach II-A Structured HCI Actions II-B Model Input II-B 1 Input Screencast Processing II-B 2 Model Input Representation II-C Model Architecture II-C 1 3D-CNN based Spatio-Temporal Feature Extraction II-C 2 Multi-task User Action Prediction III Experiment Design III-A Dataset III-A 1 Data collection III-A 2 Manual labeling III-B Evaluation metrics IV Evaluation Results and Findings IV-A Overall model performance (RQ1) IV-A 1 Motivation IV-A 2 Method IV-A 3 Result IV-B Impact of joint learning (RQ2) IV-B 1 Motivation IV-B 2 Method IV-B 3 Result IV-C Impact of multi-task learning (RQ3) IV-C 1 Motivation IV-C 2 Method IV-C 3 Result V Pilot Study: Bug Reproduction V-A Motivation V-B A Screencast-to-ActionScript Tool V-C Pilot Study V-C 1 Bug Reproduction Dataset V-C 2 Study Procedure V-C 3 Results and Analysis VI Related Work VII Threats to Validity VIII Conclusion and Future work SeeAction: Towards Reverse Engineering How-What-Where of HCI Actions from Screencasts for UI Automation 1 st Dehai Zhao CSIRO’s Data61 Sydney, Australia dehai.zhao@data61.csiro.au 2 nd Zhenchang Xing CSIRO’s Data61 School of Computing, ANU Sydney, Australia zhenchang.xing@data61.csiro.au 3 rd Qinghua Lu {@IEEEauthorhalign} 4 th Xiwei Xu CSIRO’s Data61 Sydney, Australia qinghua.lu@data61.csiro.au CSIRO’s Data61 Sydney, Australia xiwei.xu@data61.csiro.au 5 th Liming Zhu CSIRO’s Data61 School of CSE, UNSW Sydney, Australia liming.zhu@data61.csiro.au Abstract UI automation is an useful technique for UI testing, bug reproduction and robotic process automation. Recording the user actions with an application assists rapid development of UI automation scripts, but existing recording techniques are intrusive, rely on OS or GUI framework accessibility support or assume specific app implementations. Reverse engineering user actions from screencasts is non-intrusive, but a key reverse-engineering step is currently missing - recognize human-understandable structured user actions ( [command] [widget] [location] ) from action screencasts. To fill the gap, we propose a deep learning based computer vision model which can recognize 11 commands and 11 widgets, and generate location phrases from action screencasts, through joint learning and multi-task learning. We label a large dataset with 7260 video-action pairs, which record the user interactions with Word, Zoom, Firefox, Photoshop and Windows 10 Settings. Through extensive experiments, we confirm the effectiveness and generality of our model, and demonstrate the usefulness of a screencast-to-action-script tool built upon our model for bug reproduction. Index Terms: UI Automation, Multi-task Learning, Action Recognition, UI Testing I Introduction UI automation reduces or assists the repetitive, manual digital tasks of a human worker by a “digital worker”. In the context of software engineering, it is used to simulate an end-user’s interaction with an application for UI testing [ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 ] or bug reproduction [ 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 ] . Beyond software engineering, UI automation is a core capability in robotic process automation [ 9 ] which aims to automate business operations such as invoice processing, inventory or human resources management. UI automation can be achieved through textual-script or visual-script based techniques, such as Selenium [ 10 ] , Appium [ 11 ] , UIAutomator [ 12 ] , UiPath [ 13 ] and AirTest [ 14 ] . UI Automation scripts can be coded from scratch, which involves repetitive and error prone manual work. In practice, UI automation tools often support record-and-replay for recording human-computer interaction (HCI) actions from which automation scripts can be produced. The recorded scripts can be automatically replayed or be used as a boilerplate script to expand from. Figure 1: Examples of structured HCI actions HCI actions can be recorded at three levels: operating system (OS) [ 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 ] , GUI framework [ 19 ] or application [ 3 , 20 , 11 , 10 , 1 ] . Recording at application level is preferable because it outputs human understandable scripts, rather than system or API calls. Figure 1 shows some examples of application-level HCI actions which we refer to as structured HCI actions in this work. Structured refers to three integral parts of an action: how (command, e.g., click, type, drag); what (widgets, if any, that the action operates, e.g., button, text, icon); and where (location in the UI where the action occurs, e.g., popup, search bar, folder). Such structured HCI actions are in a human understandable format that we see in application usage tutorials [ 21 ] and steps-to-reproduce descriptions in bug reports [ 6 , 7 , 8 ] . Furthermore, they are robust to changes of screen resolutions and sizes, and changes in spatial arrangements of GUI widgets, compared with low-level screen coordinates. Some HCI recording tools require app source code (e.g., Espresso [ 20 ] ) or customized OS (e.g., VALERA [ 19 ] ). Due to their intrusiveness, such recoding tools have limited applicability [ 22 ] . Most recording techniques are less intrusive, but they still require either accessibility support from OS or GUI framework [ 11 , 12 ] or dynamic instrumentation of software applications [ 1 , 2 ] . As such, user actions involving non-accessible-friendly widgets, for example custom widgets like non-Android webview in hybrid apps, cannot be effectively recorded. Dynamic instrumentation hooks to specific APIs (e.g., event dispatcher, Android TextView for rich text editor) and is sensitive to system and implementation changes. It may also introduce the incompatibility with the instrumented apps [ 22 ] . It is desirable to develop non-intrusive record-and-replay techniques, independent of OS, GUI frameworks and application implementations. This non-intrusiveness is important to support user experience testing [ 23 ] and to support closed embedded systems that are increasingly used in entertainment, education and industry [ 9 ] . Screen recording non-intrusively produces a video recording of HCI actions. Structured user actions can be non-intrusively reverse-engineered from screen recordings using computer vision techniques. This reverse-engineering process involves three steps: first, video segmentation to segment the video into video fragments of individual actions; second, structured action recognition to generate how-what-where information of HCI actions from video fragments; third, widget identification to identify GUI widget details involved the actions. Techniques have been developed for video segmentation [ 24 , 25 ] , simple HCI action prediction [ 26 , 27 ] , and widget detection [ 28 ] . However, effective techniques for structured action recognition from action videos are missing, without which we will not have a working reverse-engineering pipeline. Recently, large language models (LLMs) have gained popularity, with some advancing to support vision features [ 29 ] . However, supporting video action recognition remains a significant challenge. While some work has developed LLMs for action recognition in videos [ 30 , 31 ] , these models primarily support videos in natural scenes. It has been demonstrated that screencasts present different challenges compared to natural scenes [ 26 ] . Moreover, LLMs require substantial computational resources. It is not necessary to employ large and heavy models for all problems. A specialized and compact AI model is a more efficient and effective choice for addressing domain-specific problems. This work fills the gap. We propose a novel model to recognize user actions in screencast fragments and generate structured natural language descriptions of user actions such as those in Figure 1 . Given an action screencast, we first compute the structural similarity [ 32 ] of adjacent frames to obtain change regions and similarity maps. Our model takes three data streams as input: the sequences of original video frames, cropped change regions and similarity maps. Then the three data streams pass through three 3D Covolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [ 33 ] respectively which extract spatio-temporal features. The features from three channels are concatenated for three tasks: command classification, widget classification and location phrase generation. We define 11 classes of commands and 11 classes of widgets to be recognized from screencast fragments, based on previous literature [ 17 , 34 , 26 ] and the actions and widgets supported by visual script based automation tools such as Airtest [ 14 ] and sikulix [ 35 ] . Location phrase is free form that covers common expressions of locations on UI from application usage tutorials [ 21 ] . The model is trained end-to-end by joint learning and multi-task learning. To train and evaluate our model, we build the first dataset of screencasts labeled with structured user action descriptions, which contains a total of 7,260 video-action pairs. The videos are application demonstration videos from YouTube and bug reproduction screencasts from Firefox. We select five desktop applications with distinct functionalities: Word, Zoom, Firefox, Photoshop, Windows 10 Settings. The applications run on Windows, Linux and macOS. The videos are segmented and labeled with structured user-action descriptions manually by the two authors. Our experiments on this dataset show that our model achieves high recognition accuracy (0.82 F1-score for command classification, 0.85 F1-score for widget classification, and 0.77 BLEU [ 36 ] , 0.51 METEOR [ 37 ] , 0.76 ROUGE [ 38 ] and 2.85 CIDEr [ 39 ] for location phrase generation). Furthermore, the joint learning of the three data streams can significantly improve the model performance, and the multi-task learning can also enhance the model performance, especially for location phrase generation. To demonstrate the usefulness of our model, we integrate it with a simple heuristic-based video fragmentation method and the GUI widget detection method [ 28 ] into a screencast-to-actionscript tool. We apply this tool to 100 bug reproduction screencasts from Firefox and obtain the action scripts for reproducing these bugs. In a comparative study, the Firefox users reproduce 45% more bugs following the action scripts generated by our tool, compared with those following the original steps-to-reproduce (S2R) descriptions in the bug reports due to many S2R quality issues such as ambiguous steps, vocabulary mismatch, missing steps, or even absent S2R text [ 5 ] . The results show the potentials of our model for supporting UI automation tasks such as bug reproduction. We make the following contributions in this paper: • To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to recognize structured user actions from screencasts. It is an essential step towards non-intuitive UI automation. • To recognize structured user actions from screencasts, we propose a novel computer vision model, which is trained end-to-end by joint learning and multi-task learning. • We label and contribute the first screencast dataset with 7260 video-action pairs, which record the user interactions with five popular desktop applications. • Through extensive experiments, we not only confirm the effectiveness and generality of our model, but also demonstrate its usefulness for generating high-quality, human-understandable action scripts for bug reproduction. II Approach Given a screencast fragment recording of a user action with an application, our approach outputs a structured natural language description of this action. The screencast fragment is first processed by computer vision techniques to obtain three data streams, i.e., the sequence of original frames, cropped change regions and similarity maps. Next, the three image sequences pass through three 3D CNNs [ 33 ] respectively to extract spatio-temporal features (see Figure 2 ), which are finally used to predict structured user actions including command category, widget category and location phrase. We formulate the spatio-temporal feature extraction as joint learning and structured user action prediction as multi-task learning. II-A Structured HCI Actions We summarize 11 command classes and 11 widget classes based on our personal experiences with software applications, previous work [ 26 , 17 , 18 ] , and the commands and widgets supported by popular visual-script automation tools (e.g., AirTest [ 14 ] , sikuli [ 35 ] ). The 11 command categories include Click, Drag, Hover, Scroll down, Scroll up, Select, Type, Zoom in, Zoom out, Appear and Disappear. The first nine commands are user operations, while Appear and Disappear are app responses (i.e., the outcomes of user operations). We include app responses because they represent critical information in the screencasts for downstream applications, for example, assertions for UI testing [ 19 ] . The 11 widget classes are Button, Checkbox (including Radio Button), Dropdown, Icon, Image, Text (including Text Field), Window, Page, Tab, Popup and Others. The first six widget classes are atomic widgets for presenting information and collecting user inputs, while Window, Page, Tab and Popup are container widgets for grouping visual content. We include others to represent miscellaneous widgets that are not widely present in applications (e.g., geometry graph). Different from commands and widgets, the location information requires a free-form short phrase to express, which will be assembled from a vocabulary. The vocabulary can be built from application usage tutorials (e.g., WikiHow [ 21 ] ) or from the labeled screencast dataset (see Section III-A ). Note that command, widget and location have latent associations. For example, user actions can be [click] [button] or [type] [text] [in search bar], but not [type] [button] or [click] [text] [in toolbar]. II-B Model Input A user interaction with application is recorded as a screencast. The raw screencast will be processed into a fixed-length sequence of adjacently-distinct screenshots. From this sequence of screenshots (frames), a grayscale similarity map is computed between adjacent screenshots and change regions are subsequently detected from the similarity map. The sequence of the original screenshots, together with the obtained sequences of similarity maps and change regions, will be fed into the deep learning model. II-B 1 Input Screencast Processing We decode a raw screencast video into a sequence of frames at a sample rate of 5 frames per second (fps). According to our empirical observation, 5fps sample rate keeps sufficient frames to represent HCI actions and screen changes, without too many redundant frames. We further scan the frame sequence from the beginning and remove the adjacently-identical frames (i.e., no screen changes). User actions vary in duration (0.2 to 10 seconds in our labeled data), leading to different frame sequence lengths. But the deep learning mo