Title: Agent-Initiated Interaction in Phone UI Automation

Abstract: Phone automation agents aim to autonomously perform a given natural-language user request, such as scheduling appointments or booking a hotel. While much research effort has been devoted to screen understanding and action planning, complex tasks often necessitate user interaction for successful completion. Aligning the agent with the user's expectations is crucial for building trust and enabling personalized experiences. This requires the agent to proactively engage the user when necessary, avoiding actions that violate their preferences while refraining from unnecessary questions where a default action is expected. We argue that such subtle agent-initiated interaction with the user deserves focused research attention.   To promote such research, this paper introduces a task formulation for detecting the need for user interaction and generating appropriate messages. We thoroughly define the task, including aspects like interaction timing and the scope of the agent's autonomy. Using this definition, we derived annotation guidelines and created AndroidInteraction, a diverse dataset for the task, leveraging an existing UI automation dataset. We tested several text-based and multimodal baseline models for the task, finding that it is very challenging for current LLMs. We suggest that our task formulation, dataset, baseline models and analysis will be valuable for future UI automation research, specifically in addressing this crucial yet often overlooked aspect of agent-initiated interaction. This work provides a needed foundation to allow personalized agents to properly engage the user when needed, within the context of phone UI automation.

Body: Agent-Initiated Interaction in Phone UI Automation 1 Introduction 2 Background 2.1 UI Automation Agents 2.2 User Interaction in UI Automation 2.3 The AndroidControl Dataset 3 User Interaction in UI Automation: Task Definition Scope of the User Instruction: Interaction Timing: User preferences: 4 AndroidInteraction 4.1 Dataset Structure 4.2 Data Collection Methodology Data Selection: Assessing Necessity Level: 4.3 Data Quality Analysis 4.4 Dataset Analysis Types of User Interaction 4.5 Dataset Challenges and Limitations 5 Baseline Models 6 Results and Analysis 7 Conclusion and Future Work Ethical Considerations in Autonomous Agent Development Data Collection and Privacy A Model Error Analysis B Additional Examples from AndroidInteraction \setcctype by Agent-Initiated Interaction in Phone UI Automation Noam Kahlon 0009-0004-0097-7417 Google Research Mountain View CA USA kahlonn@google.com , Guy Rom 0009-0004-2537-9018 Google Research Mountain View CA USA , Anatoly Efros 0009-0000-1451-3438 Google Research Mountain View CA USA talef@google.com , Filippo Galgani 0000-0002-3553-3611 Google Research Mountain View CA USA galganif@google.com , Omri Berkovitch 0009-0009-4337-4954 Google Research Mountain View CA USA berkovitchomri@google.com , Sapir Caduri 0009-0009-2298-0605 Google Research Mountain View CA USA sapir@google.com , William E. Bishop 0009-0002-4377-3989 Google Research Mountain View CA USA willbishop@google.com , Oriana Riva 0009-0007-4514-009X Google Research Mountain View CA USA oriva@google.com and Ido Dagan 0009-0007-0165-606X Google Research Mountain View CA USA Bar-Ilan University Ramat Gan Israel idodagan@google.com (2025) Abstract. Phone automation agents aim to autonomously perform a given natural-language user request, such as scheduling appointments or booking a hotel. While much research effort has been devoted to screen understanding and action planning, complex tasks often necessitate user interaction for successful completion. Aligning the agent with the user’s expectations is crucial for building trust and enabling personalized experiences. This requires the agent to proactively engage the user when necessary, avoiding actions that violate their preferences while refraining from unnecessary questions where a default action is expected. We argue that such subtle agent-initiated interaction with the user deserves focused research attention. To promote such research, this paper introduces a task formulation for detecting the need for user interaction and generating appropriate messages. We thoroughly define the task, including aspects like interaction timing and the scope of the agent’s autonomy. Using this definition, we derived annotation guidelines and created AndroidInteraction, a diverse dataset for the task, leveraging an existing UI automation dataset. We tested several text-based and multimodal baseline models for the task, finding that it is very challenging for current LLMs. We suggest that our task formulation, dataset, baseline models and analysis will be valuable for future UI automation research, specifically in addressing this crucial yet often overlooked aspect of agent-initiated interaction. This work provides a needed foundation to allow personalized agents to properly engage the user when needed, within the context of phone UI automation. phone UI automation; Conversational Interaction; Dataset † † journalyear: 2025 † † copyright: cc † † conference: Companion Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2025; April 28-May 2, 2025; Sydney, NSW, Australia † † booktitle: Companion Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2025 (WWW Companion ’25), April 28-May 2, 2025, Sydney, NSW, Australia † † doi: 10.1145/3701716.3717526 † † isbn: 979-8-4007-1331-6/2025/04 † † ccs: Human-centered computing HCI design and evaluation methods † † ccs: Human-centered computing Natural language interfaces † † ccs: Human-centered computing Personal digital assistants 1. Introduction Autonomous agents capable of interacting with a smartphone’s graphical user interface (GUI) to complete tasks on behalf of users have drawn significant interest (Yan et al . , 2023 ; Wen et al . , 2023 ; Yang et al . , 2023 ; Li et al . , 2024 ) . The agent, presented with a natural language (NL) instruction and a starting screen, iteratively executes the instruction through a series of GUI interactions. The agent can perceive the screen, potentially accessing UI metadata such as the accessibility tree, 1 1 1 An accessibility tree is a hierarchical structured representation of the UI elements in a screen, providing information about their type, properties, and relationships. It is often used by assistive and other technologies to facilitate interaction with the UI. and is capable of performing a wide range of GUI actions, such as tapping, swiping, and inputting text. These agents hold the promise of substantially increasing user experience and efficiency in phone-based tasks and improving accessibility for individuals who are physically or situationally impaired (Li et al . , 2023 , 2024 ; Wang et al . , 2023 ) . To truly personalize these agents and enable them to effectively serve individual users, a deeper understanding of user needs and preferences is crucial. This necessitates moving beyond simple task execution and empowering agents to actively engage in interactions with users. By proactively seeking information or clarification, these agents can tailor their actions to individual preferences and avoid unintended consequences. This introduces a critical need for alignment between the agent’s actions and the user’s intentions, which is essential for fostering user trust and creating personalized experiences. As a step in this direction, our work explores the yet underexplored area of agent-user alignment in phone automation, particularly in scenarios where interaction with the user is needed. Figure 1 . An illustrating example of an instruction requiring user interaction in phone UI automation. The user requests to cancel their meeting tomorrow, unaware that there are two meetings scheduled for the next day. See figure 2 and appendix B for additional examples. \Description Screenshots from a phone’s Calendar app, illustrating a scenario where a user has requested to cancel their meeting tomorrow. The last screenshot displays the next day’s calendar with two meetings scheduled on different times. This necessitates the agent formulating a message to specify which meeting they want to cancel. In fact, many tasks necessitate interaction with the user for purposes such as gathering additional information, confirming sensitive actions or clarifying ambiguous instructions (Wang et al . , 2023 ; Sun et al . , 2022 ; Todi et al . , 2021 ) . For instance, given an initial screen displaying a document, the instruction "send this doc to Alex" could trigger several types of user interactions. The agent might ask the user to clarify which contact named Alex to send it to or which app to use. If the document is sensitive, the agent might seek confirmation before proceeding. The agent might also need to inform that the task is infeasible, for example if the document is locked for sharing (See Figure 1 for an additional illustrated example). In many cases, particularly with complex tasks, the need for user interaction arises dynamically during task execution (Lù et al . , 2024 ) , making its detection crucial to maintain user control and ensure alignment between the agent’s actions and the user’s preferences (Kim et al . , 2024 ) . Despite its importance, this aspect remains largely unaddressed in current UI automation research (see Section 2.2 for further discussion). An autonomous agent capable of user interaction must be able to: 1) detect the need for interaction, 2) formulate an appropriate message to the user, and 3) integrate the user’s response to proceed with the task. This paper focuses on the first two challenges. As an initial step towards tackling these challenges, we leverage an existing phone automation dataset, which did not originally include user interaction, to develop AndroidInteraction, an effective dataset for detecting the need for user interaction and generating appropriate messages 2 2 2 The dataset is available at https://github.com/google-research/google-research/tree/master/android_interaction . This involved a role-playing exercise where annotators simulated user interactions to capture diverse needs and preferences. AndroidInteraction embodies several inherent challenges of this task, such as the subjectivity in assessing when interaction is required. We address these challenges in our task formulation and data collection process. Additionally, we present and evaluate several baseline models on the AndroidInteraction dataset, and analyze their performance. We believe our work can facilitate research on agent-initiated interaction within the realm of phone UI automation. Overall, we make the following contributions: • Introducing a novel task formulation for agent-initiated interaction in phone UI automation, including detecting the need for interaction and generating a suitable message to the user. • Creating AndroidInteraction, a diverse dataset, of over 750 demonstrations spanning over 250 different apps, which allows to evaluate models’ performance on the interaction task. • Introducing, evaluating and analyzing several baseline models for the task using our dataset. 2. Background 2.1. UI Automation Agents Phone automation agents aim to autonomously complete tasks on behalf of the user. A prevalent approach involves interacting with apps via APIs, similar to slot-filling in task-oriented dialogue systems (Zhan and Zhang, 2023 ; Wen et al . , 2023 ) , but this method is constrained by the need for application-specific API access and manual configuration of task workflows. In contrast, UI-based task automation simulates human-UI interactions, offering greater generality and adaptability but facing challenges in generalizing to complex tasks across diverse apps (Yang et al . , 2023 ; Wang et al . , 2023 ; Sun et al . , 2022 ) . In order to represent the UI for UI-based automation, a primary approach uses textual formats (Wang et al . , 2021 ; Zhang et al . , 2021 ) , such as OCR and icon labels (Rawles et al . , 2023 ) , or system-provided accessibility trees (Bishop et al . , 2024 ) . Another approach utilizes multimodal models (Yan et al . , 2023 ; Hong et al . , 2023 ) to integrate visual information from the screen. While the latter approach incorporates valuable visual cues, it faces challenges in data requirements and complexity (Yang et al . , 2023 ) . UI automation agent evaluation typically falls into two categories. One approach (Toyama et al . , 2021 ; Schneider et al . , 2022 ) involves simulating an interactive phone environment, typically measuring task fulfillment success. This approach allows a detailed analysis of efficiency and quality, but are harder to develop across diverse apps and tasks. A more common evaluation method utilizes static gold datasets (Li et al . , 2020 ; Venkatesh et al . , 2022 ; Burns et al . , 2022 ) , composed of recorded human demonstrations of task execution. Each recording is a sequence of action-observation pairs, where observations include screenshots and metadata (like icon recognition or OCR), along with the annotator’s actions. Agent evaluation involves step-wise comparison of its selected actions with the recorded actions. However, measuring accuracy in this approach is challenging as there are almost always multiple ways to execute the same user request. For example, the instruction "delete my last email sent to David" could be accomplished by either searching for "David" or navigating to the sent emails folder. Figure 2 . First steps of an example episode from the AndroidControl dataset. The user instruction is to book a train from London to Brighton on a specific date using the Omio app. The 4th step was labelled as requiring user interaction in our dataset, with the message: "From which London station would you like to depart?". \Description Four phone screenshots illustrating an automated task of booking a train ride from London to Brighton. The fourth screenshot displays multiple possible departure stations that match the "London" search query, suggesting a needed question from the agent to clarify the user’s intention. 2.2. User Interaction in UI Automation The need for user interaction for task completion has long been acknowledged within traditional task-oriented dialogue systems. These systems typically operate within a restricted domain and rely on a predefined data schema, with dialogues primarily serving to pull information for slot-filling (Zhang et al . , 2020 ; Chen et al . , 2017 ) . Conversely, phone UI automation operates in a generic , open-domain setting, presenting additional challenges due to the need to proactively interact with a dynamic and visually rich environment. User interaction may be necessary not only for disambiguating intents or filling in missing details but also for addressing unforeseen situations arising from UI interactions, such as confirming potentially sensitive actions. Despite this, most datasets (Rawles et al . , 2023 ) and models (Zhan and Zhang, 2023 ) for phone UI automation neglect the user interaction aspect, and assume that tasks can be executed without user involvement. Some exceptions do exist, though. Wang et al . ( 2023 ) proposed a categorization of user interaction based on two binary dimensions, resulting in four distinct scenarios: the initiator — user or agent, and the purpose — soliciting or providing information. However, their data concerning agent-initiated interaction is limited. The portion addressing information solicitation only deals with clarification questions about empty fields on a single screen. The portion dealing with information providing is restricted to single-screen summarization. Both represent only a fraction of the agent-initiated interactions necessary for complex task completion. Sun et al . ( 2022 ) introduced a model and dataset for phone UI automation tasks involving multi-turn conversations. Yet, their data focuses on a limited set of apps and interactions, lacking diversity. Burns et al . ( 2022 ) focused on a specific setting of detecting task infeasibility, by examining feasible instructions on one app that were infeasible on a similar app. Lastly, Lù et al . ( 2024 ) presented recently a conversational-agent dataset and model, in the domain of web agents, which is closest to our targeted scenario. This dataset is complementary to ours in that it covers web browser interactions rather than phone apps automation, and in addressing interaction mainly within smaller sub-tasks that are specified by the user during a longer interactive browser session. 2.3. The AndroidControl Dataset For our research, we leverage a subset of the data collecte for AndroidControl (Li et al .