Title: Fara-7B: An Efficient Agentic Model for Computer Use

Abstract: Progress in computer use agents (CUAs) has been constrained by the absence of large and high-quality datasets that capture how humans interact with a computer. While LLMs have thrived on abundant textual data, no comparable corpus exists for CUA trajectories. To address these gaps, we introduce FaraGen, a novel synthetic data generation system for multi-step web tasks. FaraGen can propose diverse tasks from frequently used websites, generate multiple solution attempts, and filter successful trajectories using multiple verifiers. It achieves high throughput, yield, and diversity for multi-step web tasks, producing verified trajectories at approximately $1 each. We use this data to train Fara-7B, a native CUA model that perceives the computer using only screenshots, executes actions via predicted coordinates, and is small enough to run on-device. We find that Fara-7B outperforms other CUA models of comparable size on benchmarks like WebVoyager, Online-Mind2Web, and WebTailBench -- our novel benchmark that better captures under-represented web tasks in pre-existing benchmarks. Furthermore, Fara-7B is competitive with much larger frontier models, illustrating key benefits of scalable data generation systems in advancing small efficient agentic models. We are making Fara-7B open-weight on Microsoft Foundry and HuggingFace, and we are releasing WebTailBench.

Body: Fara-7B: An Efficient Agentic Model for Computer Use 1 Introduction Fara-7B: A small native CUA model. 2 FaraGen– A Synthetic Data Engine for CUA 2.1 Task Proposal 2.2 Task Solving 2.2.1 Orchestrator 2.2.2 WebSurfer 2.3 Trajectory Verification 2.4 FaraGen Data Statistics 3 Fara-7B – An Efficient CUA Model 3.1 Formulation 3.2 Model Training 4 WebTailBench 5 Experiments 5.1 Agentic Evaluations 5.1.1 Environment and Settings 5.1.2 Main Results 5.1.3 WebTailBench Results 5.2 Grounding 5.3 Data and Inference Steps Scaling 5.4 Safety - Refusals and Critical Points 6 Related Work 7 Discussion A Token Pricing B Data Visualization B.1 Grounding Examples B.2 Caption Examples B.3 Screenshot Question Answering Data B.4 Refusal Data C Model Training Details D Safety Evaluation Details D.1 WebTailBench-Refusals D.2 Critical Point Evaluation D.3 Web Task-Solving Performance † † Authors listed in alphabetical order, * denotes Core Contributors, † Senior author Fara-7B: An Efficient Agentic Model for Computer Use Ahmed Awadallah † Yash Lara Raghav Magazine Hussein Mozannar * Akshay Nambi Yash Pandya Aravind Rajeswaran Corby Rosset * Alexey Taymanov * Vibhav Vineet Spencer Whitehead * Andrew Zhao (November 24, 2025) Abstract Progress in computer use agents (CUAs) has been constrained by the absence of large and high-quality datasets that capture how humans interact with a computer. While LLMs have thrived on abundant textual data, no comparable corpus exists for CUA trajectories. To address these gaps, we introduce FaraGen, a novel synthetic data generation system for multi-step web tasks. FaraGen can propose diverse tasks from frequently used websites, generate multiple solution attempts, and filter successful trajectories using multiple verifiers. It achieves high throughput, yield, and diversity for multi-step web tasks, producing verified trajectories at approximately $1 each. We use this data to train Fara-7B, a native CUA model that perceives the computer using only screenshots, executes actions via predicted coordinates, and is small enough to run on-device. We find that Fara-7B outperforms other CUA models of comparable size on benchmarks like WebVoyager, Online-Mind2Web, and WebTailBench– our novel benchmark that better captures under-represented web tasks in pre-existing benchmarks. Furthermore, Fara-7B is competitive with much larger frontier models, illustrating key benefits of scalable data generation systems in advancing small efficient agentic models. We are making Fara-7B open-weight on Microsoft Foundry and HuggingFace, and we are releasing WebTailBench. Figure 1: WebVoyager accuracy and cost of Fara-7B B to other computer use agents (CUAs) and Set-of-Marks (SoM) Agents. Cost is computed based on the number of input and output tokens each model consumes by price per token. Both Fara-7B and UI-TARS-1.5-7B have the same token cost but Fara-7B completes tasks in half the steps. 1 Introduction Large Language Models (LLMs) are rapidly evolving from conversational tools into general-purpose agents capable of acting on behalf of users. Among the emerging agentic capabilities, Computer Use Agents (CUAs) that can perceive and take actions on the user’s computer stand out for their immediate potential ( claudecomputeruse ; geminicomputeruse ; openaioperator ) . They can navigate websites, fill forms, retrieve information, and generally improve productivity. A capable CUA can reduce tedious multi-step tasks to a single natural-language instruction, paving the way for ubiquitous personal digital assistants. However, the transition from “chat” to “agency” is stifled by a data bottleneck. Training a CUA model requires human-computer interaction data that reflects how humans plan and execute tasks on a computer – where to click, how to interpret visual state, how to recover from errors, and how to accomplish goals using noisy and ever-changing GUIs. While the internet provides a near-infinite corpus of text training data for chat LLMs, there is no comparable data for CUA. Collecting such data with human annotators can be prohibitively expensive and slow. Synthetic data generation presents an interesting alternative, but presents its own challenges due to the lack of strong pre-existing CUA models, and programmatic alternatives are brittle in the face of ambiguities and dynamic nature of the open web. To bridge this gap, we introduce FaraGen, a scalable synthetic data generation engine for CUA , designed specifically for web-based tasks. It employs a collaborative multi-agent architecture that simulates the full lifecycle of digital workflows. FaraGen orchestrates three specialized components to simultaneously maximize the quality, quantity, and diversity of generated trajectories: • Task Proposal: Analyzes diverse, live website to produce realistic, human-relevant tasks. • Task Solving: Employs agents to collaboratively attempt the proposed tasks, generating a broad collection of candidate trajectories. A user simulator agent provides feedback or follow-up tasks to increase trajectory complexity and realism. • Trajectory Verification: Serves as an automated quality assurance layer. We use LLM verifiers to validate trajectory outcomes against the original intent, filtering out hallucinations or execution errors to ensure high data fidelity. This closed-loop system allows FaraGen to generate verified web trajectories for roughly $1 per completed task , enabling large-scale dataset creation at a cost previously infeasible for CUA research. Our resulting data covers a wide range of modern website layouts, realistic user intents, dynamic content, and multi-turn reasoning – all essential ingredients for robust agentic behavior. Finding Fara-7B breaks ground on a new Pareto frontier (see Figure 1 ), showing that high-quality synthetic data can unlock agentic capabilities in even small models. Fara-7B: A small native CUA model. We use FaraGen to generate a dataset of 145K trajectories , spanning multiple task segments like shopping, searching for information, and making reservations. Using this data, we train a compact CUA model specialized for web-based computer use, Fara-7B . The web as it stands today is optimized for human consumption, and we believe navigating it as humans do will lead to the best results. As a result, Fara-7B adopts a “pixel-in, action-out" formulation: it perceives the computer screen directly through raw screenshots, formulates intermediate reasoning steps, and predicts atomic actions at a low-level interface (clicks, scrolls, keystrokes). This avoids dependence on brittle DOM parsing, and is consistent with recent findings that vision-centric CUAs exhibit stronger cross-site generalization ( yutori2025blog ) . We evaluate Fara-7B across existing web-based CUA benchmarks as well as a new benchmark we introduce, WebTailBench, which is designed to cover real-world web tasks often under-represented in current metrics. As illustrated in Figure 1 , Fara-7B not only achieves state of the art results for a model of its size, but is also competitive with much larger frontier models. This strong performance coupled with its small size unlocks distinct deployment advantages for CUA technology: • On-Device Execution: Fara-7B’s small footprint allows for local inference, significantly reducing latency and enhancing privacy by keeping user data locally on-device. • Cost Efficiency: The model offers excellent performance-to-cost tradeoff, averaging just a few cents per task. It is more cost-effective than UI-TARS despite similar size due to lower token utilization, and substantially cheaper compared to systems based on frontier models like GPT-5. Contributions. In summary, our primary contributions are: • FaraGen. A scalable synthetic data engine that breaks the CUA data scarcity barrier. By automating task proposal, solving, and verification, FaraGen can generate verified successful trajectories at roughly $ ​ 1 \mathdollar 1 per task. • Fara-7B. A compact (7B), CUA model. We demonstrate that high-quality synthetic data enables small models to achieve strong results, suggesting the viability of on-device agency. It is available on Huggingface and Azure Foundry. • WebTailBench. A new benchmark addressing critical gaps in existing task sets. WebTailBench targets under-represented real-world scenarios on live websites to provide a robust standard for measuring agent generalization. Figure 2: FaraGen - A breakdown of our various Task Proposal workflows, emphasizing the need for seed URLs that reflect real human users’ web needs. We find FaraGen to be capable of generating diverse trajectories with high throughput and reliability. 2 FaraGen– A Synthetic Data Engine for CUA Unlike LLMs which enjoy an abundance of web data for training, a key bottleneck in building CUA models is a lack of high-quality interaction data demonstrating how users complete tasks on a computer. Collecting such data with human annotators is very expensive and hard to scale as a single CUA task can involve dozens of steps, most of which might require human annotation and explanation. FaraGen avoids manual annotation and instead relies on scalable synthetic data sourced from real websites and custom task prompts. The pipeline involves three main stages: Task Proposal to generate realistic tasks that distributionally match what users would employ a CUA for, Task Solving which extends the Magentic-One and Magentic-UI agents ( fourney2024magenticonegeneralistmultiagentsolving ; mozannar2025magentic ) to solve tasks, and Task Verification to filter which candidate trajectories successfully completed the task. 2.1 Task Proposal We generate a broad set of synthetic tasks with the primary objective of reflecting the distribution of tasks users commonly perform on the web, targeting two broad categories: information seeking questions ( e.g., looking up product specifications, finding event details) and actionable tasks ( e.g., online purchasing, booking reservations, applying for jobs). We employ three different strategies for generating these synthetic tasks. Figure 3: FaraGen - Distributional differences between two publicly available sources of seed URLs: Tranco and Clueweb22. We find that Clueweb22 is a more valuable source of task data because it contains a lower fraction of corporate landing pages which tend to have a narrower scope of actionable tasks achievable on those pages. Targeted URL Task Proposal. To ensure coverage and diversity, the majority of our tasks are “seeded” by a web index of public URLs classified into various categories, such as e-commerce, entertainment, or forums, as shown in Figure 3 . Using additional proprietary classifiers, we further select URL sub-categories. For instance, “ restaurants ” or “ movies ”, which fall under the “ Entertainment ” category. Two URL sources that we utilize are ClueWeb22 ( overwijk2022clueweb2210billionweb ) and Tranco ( Le_Pochat_2019 ) . Not all corpora of web URLs are created equal, and we note that ClueWeb22 ( overwijk2022clueweb2210billionweb ) has more coverage of high quality websites compared to Tranco ( Le_Pochat_2019 ) , so we primarily leverage ClueWeb22. Using the URL classifications, we select URLs in particular categories to generate tasks targeted at specific skills we want Fara-7B to have. For example, we can generate a realistic user task like “ book two tickets to see Wicked: For Good at AMC Union Square, NYC. ” from a URL like https://www.fandango.com/wicked-for-good-2025-238985/movie-overview classified as “movies” . As shown in Figure 2 (left), we employ multiple iterations of LLM calls to refine a raw URL into a self-contained and verifiable task, similar to AgentInstruct ( mitra2024agentinstructgenerativeteachingagentic ) . After identifying a high-value URL, we summarize the primary intents that users landing on the page would likely have. We then prompt an LLM to generate and rank several candidate tasks until ultimately selecting those that are: 1) achievable without requiring logins or bypassing paywalls; 2) unambiguous and fully-specified; 3) useful in real scenarios; and 4) automatically verifiable. During development, we found that not enforcing these criteria resulted in up to 29% of proposed tasks being un-verifiable or un-achievable. Examples include: asking to make a phone call, investing in cryptocurrencies, applying for a credit card, booking flights without destinations, or “reading” blogs without any goal or question asked. Some segments of URLs that we directly target include: shopping (including single items and lists of items), travel (including flights, hotels, rental cars), booking restaurant reservations, booking event tickets, planning activities/itineraries, booking appointments, finding real estate, and applying to jobs. Most of these tasks involve a single concept or skill, so we furthermore create compositional tasks involving multiple websites and steps. For instance, finding a recipe and then buying its ingredients, or comparing the price of an item across two retailers. Finally, we include some subjective tasks like “ What’s the best new dive bar in Williamsburg? ”. In all, about 28% of our tasks used in training are sourced from targeted URLs. We are releasing a subset of 609 tasks as a benchmark, called WebTailBench, specifically focusing on 11 task segments underrepresented or missing in existing benchmarks. We provide more details in Section 4 . Agentic URL Exploration. The complementary strategy to targeting specific URLs and domains is to take uniform samples of URLs from the web as seeds. We generate tasks from random URLs by instantiating a multi-modal LLM agent to traverse the website, consuming both screenshots and accessibility trees ( pahuja-etal-2025-explorer ) . Shown in Figure 2 (middle), we sample a URL, navigate to it, and have the agent generate an initial query based on the webpage. The agent attempts to complete the task by iteratively taking actions. At each step, the agent refines the task based on what has been done and the current state of the page. Then, it predicts the next action required to complete the updated task. This iterative refinement gradually improves the task as the agent explores the website and gathers more information about what can be accomplished. Approximately 67% of our training tasks are derived from agent-driven explorations of randomly sampled websites. However, it is worth noting that the complexity of these tasks is often lower than the segment-targeted ones, as indicated by the number of steps required to solve them in Table 2 . This highlights the need for better automatic creation of complex tasks. Examplar Task Proposal. As in Figure 2 (right), our third strategy for proposing tasks is to expand a bank of existing seed tasks into different related tasks. For instance, if a given task is to buy an item or book a flight, we use an LLM to break it down into a template of its primary intent, entities, 