Title: ActionReasoning: Robot Action Reasoning in 3D Space with LLM for Robotic Brick Stacking

Abstract: Classical robotic systems typically rely on custom planners designed for constrained environments. While effective in restricted settings, these systems lack generalization capabilities, limiting the scalability of embodied AI and general-purpose robots. Recent data-driven Vision-Language-Action (VLA) approaches aim to learn policies from large-scale simulation and real-world data. However, the continuous action space of the physical world significantly exceeds the representational capacity of linguistic tokens, making it unclear if scaling data alone can yield general robotic intelligence. To address this gap, we propose ActionReasoning, an LLM-driven framework that performs explicit action reasoning to produce physics-consistent, prior-guided decisions for robotic manipulation. ActionReasoning leverages the physical priors and real-world knowledge already encoded in Large Language Models (LLMs) and structures them within a multi-agent architecture. We instantiate this framework on a tractable case study of brick stacking, where the environment states are assumed to be already accurately measured. The environmental states are then serialized and passed to a multi-agent LLM framework that generates physics-aware action plans. The experiments demonstrate that the proposed multi-agent LLM framework enables stable brick placement while shifting effort from low-level domain-specific coding to high-level tool invocation and prompting, highlighting its potential for broader generalization. This work introduces a promising approach to bridging perception and execution in robotic manipulation by integrating physical reasoning with LLMs.

Body: ActionReasoning: Robot Action Reasoning in 3D Space with LLM for Robotic Brick Stacking I INTRODUCTION II RELATED WORK II-A Robotic Manipulation Learning II-B LLM/VLM Based Robotic Operation III METHODS III-A LLM based Multi-agent Framework for Robot Action Reasoning III-A 1 Markovian waypoint loop III-A 2 Feasible set and selection III-A 3 Agent pipeline with gating A ​ g 1 Ag_{1} Pre-grasp positioning A ​ g 2 Ag_{2} Descent opening A ​ g 3 Ag_{3} Grasp closure A ​ g 4 Ag_{4} Safe lift A ​ g 5 Ag_{5} Brick placement A ​ g 6 Ag_{6} Return-to-ready III-B Agent Construction via Structured Prompting IV Experiments IV-A Task and Setup IV-B Evaluation Protocol and Metrics IV-B 1 Pose accuracy IV-B 2 3D IoU IV-C Baseline and Ablation Study Methods IV-C 1 Controller baseline IV-C 2 Single-Agent ablation IV-D Experiment Results IV-D 1 Controller baseline IV-D 2 Single-Agent ablation V CONCLUSIONS ActionReasoning: Robot Action Reasoning in 3D Space with LLM for Robotic Brick Stacking Guangming Wang ∗ , Qizhen Ying ∗ , Yixiong Jing†, Olaf Wysocki, and Brian Sheil This work was supported in part by Computer Vision for Digital Twins (CV4DT), Cambridge Centre for Smart Infrastructure and Construction (CSIC) and Laing O’Rourke Centre for Construction Engineering and Technology, Cambridge. (Corresponding Author: Yixiong Jing)* Equal contributions † Co-corresponding authorsG. Wang, Y. Jing, Olaf Wysocki, and B. Sheil are with the CV4DT, CSIC, Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1PZ, U.K. (e-mail: gw462@cam.ac.uk, yj401@cam.ac.uk, okw24@cam.ac.uk, bbs24@cam.ac.uk)Q. Ying is with the Department of Engineering, University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K. (e-mail: qizhen.ying@exeter.ox.ac.uk). Code will be available at https://github.com/StephenYing/Action_Reasoning Abstract Classical robotic systems typically rely on custom planners designed for constrained environments. While effective in restricted settings, these systems lack generalization capabilities, limiting the scalability of embodied AI and general‑purpose robots. Recent data‑driven Vision‑Language‑Action (VLA) approaches aim to learn policies from large‑scale simulation and real‑world data. However, the continuous action space of the physical world significantly exceeds the representational capacity of linguistic tokens, making it unclear if scaling data alone can yield general robotic intelligence. To address this gap, we propose ActionReasoning, an LLM-driven framework that performs explicit action reasoning to produce physics-consistent, prior-guided decisions for robotic manipulation. ActionReasoning leverages the physical priors and real-world knowledge already encoded in Large Language Models (LLMs) and structures them within a multi-agent architecture. We instantiate this framework on a tractable case study of brick stacking, where the environment states are assumed to be already accurately measured. The environmental states are then serialized and passed to a multi-agent LLM framework that generates physics-aware action plans. The experiments demonstrate that the proposed multi-agent LLM framework enables stable brick placement while shifting effort from low-level domain-specific coding to high-level tool invocation and prompting, highlighting its potential for broader generalization. This work introduces a promising approach to bridging perception and execution in robotic manipulation by integrating physical reasoning with LLMs. Figure 1 : Three stages of the ActionReasoning pipeline. (1) Inputs World Model: The world model of bricklaying is provided as input. (2) Multi-Agent Planning: Leveraging the world model input, an LLM orchestrator decomposes the task into specialized agents that generate actions and waypoints to plan the motion of a selected brick toward its target location. (3) Simulator Robot Execution: The robot (a Kuka simulator in this case) executes the planned actions from multiple agents to control grasp and motion. Observations from changes in the 3D scene and robot arm state are used to update the world model, enabling continual re-planning as the task progresses. I INTRODUCTION Recent progress in humanoids and general manipulation policies has attracted significant attention in embodied intelligence. VLA models, such as RT‑2 [ 27 ] and OpenVLA [ 13 ] , large open datasets like Open‑X‑Embodiment [ 17 ] , and open policies such as Octo [ 15 ] demonstrate that scaling data and model capacity can improve reusability across tasks and hardware platforms. However, while LLMs in the text domain demonstrate emergent generalization through scaling, such “scale→emergence” capability has not yet been achieved with comparable robustness for universal robot control. Performance continues to degrade across diverse tasks, embodiments, and long-horizon reasoning, which indicates that merely scaling data and parameters alone is insufficient for robust generalization. Therefore, the proposition that “sheer scaling alone can yield general-purpose manipulation” needs to be treated with increasing caution in the robotics community, as there is a much larger solution space of robot actions compared to the language space. The lack of generalizability in robotics has motivated the increasing attention and research interest in world models. World models have been defined and studied in multiple ways. Some research focuses on predicting environmental dynamics and deducing future states in a latent space to support planning and control [ 8 , 10 ] . Other recent works have introduced ‘generative foundation world models’ [ 9 , 3 ] that produce interactive environments from condition information, like one image or one sentence of the current environment. The term spans both an abstraction of universal physical laws and commonsense knowledge, as well as computable representations of scene geometry and dynamics in the current environment. Accordingly, this paper adopts an operational definition for robots: World Model = (A) universal physical knowledge and commonsense priors + (B) precise representations of the environment in which the robot operates. Here, (A) corresponds to a “general knowledge base,” while (B) aligns with Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) [ 4 ] and semantic geometry [ 26 ] , where (B) enables the environment state to be queryable and constrained. This paper focuses on how a world model can be used for robotics tasks, rather than how to learn one. As shown in Fig. 1 , we assume that the robot can obtain accurate 3D environmental states (e.g., 3D scene and robot arm states) through existing perception pipelines, and then combine these with the physical commonsense and task specifications (e.g., objective) already internalized in LLMs. This integration enables a form of 3D action reasoning: the LLM performs multi-step physical reasoning in the 3D environment with world model input, where the reasoning from the LLM orchestrator guides the robot arm in the simulator to finish tasks. To make the problem concrete and testable, we conduct systematic experiments and ablations on a representative task: brick stacking. This task involves typical physical constraints such as object contact, stability, and tolerance, while also requiring multi-step sequencing and precise pose coordination, making it a suitable testbed for 3D action reasoning. The recent LLM-based robot system, ReKep [ 11 ] , leveraged a generalizable perception models, Vision Language Models (VLMs), to identify actionable keypoints in the environment. However, 2D action keypoints lack understanding of complex 3D scenes, making them vulnerable to occlusion, foreshortening, and varied camera placements. Moreover, when LLMs are given images as inputs, these keypoints occupy a certain image region and are sometimes ambiguous or poorly localized. In addition, it still relies on dedicated off-the-shelf solvers. Our framework differs in that it (i) ingests explicit 3D scene states as LLM input, reducing reliance on 2D keypoint without 3D sensing, (ii) outputs phase‑conditioned action proposals and performs multi‑turn LLM calls when needed to refine plans, mimicking humans’ “think‑while‑doing”. Overall, this work achieves the following contributions: • We introduce ActionReasoning, i.e., a 3D action‑reasoning framework that enables robot decision‑making for brick stacking with high-level tool invocation and prompting, demonstrating generalization across configurations without per‑scene code. • We design a multi‑agent LLM orchestrator, where the specialized agents at different stages fuse human task specifications with world model input to reason in SE(3). • We provide simulation studies and ablations showing that 3D LLM reasoning improves robustness compared with the traditional control method with a similar simple programming, establishing a foundation for future LLM‑driven physical reasoning in robotics. II RELATED WORK II-A Robotic Manipulation Learning Traditional manipulation robots rely on a structured pipeline in which the scene is perceived, a task-level representation is constructed, and detailed motions are programmed for execution within a given environment. Task‑and‑motion planning (TAMP) integrates symbolic task decomposition with continuous motion feasibility, but still assumes substantial domain modelling and engineering for each setting [ 6 ] . Even seemingly simple stacking tasks require extensive development on scripted sequencing, grasp poses, and constraint handling. Subsequently, Reinforcement Learning (RL) enabled training in environments without the need for task-specific programming for grasping or manipulation. By employing an action policy network and designing appropriate rewards, a robotic arm can explore the action space within simulations and achieve target tasks rewarded by the reward function. Since object positions (e.g., brick placements) can be freely configured in simulation, the success rate in simulated environments is often high. The subsequent research began exploring ways to accelerate this process, for example, by learning a corrective policy on top of a base controller [ 12 ] or using base controllers as priors to guide exploration [ 19 ] . Such controllers bias the search toward regions of the solution space where conventional algorithms are more likely to succeed, thereby speeding up RL convergence. However, this still requires manually designing and coding the low-level controllers, with the ultimate aim of enabling RL to converge faster and eventually outperform the controllers themselves. Despite these advances, the sim-to-real gap remains a major challenge in this line of research [ 23 ] . Although the recent Sim2Real2Sim pipeline proposed in [ 23 ] has made such sim‑to‑real transfers feasible, such trained models remain limited to the sampled real-world data distribution. Training a general model which is deployable in the real world still demands extensive real data collection and 3D modelling efforts. Similarly, VLA models [ 27 , 13 , 15 ] push end‑to‑end learning from vision/language to actions, but also require large data. As a result, industry continues to rely heavily on large-scale data acquisition with demonstration datasets [ 2 , 18 ] and teleoperation datasets [ 25 , 1 ] . These remain the mainstream solutions for improving the general capabilities of robots. However, a key challenge is that the robots’ action space is far larger than the vocabulary space of language. For LLMs, although the human vocabulary is vast, it is still finite. Once each word is vectorized, predicting the next word becomes a problem of discrete space prediction. In contrast, the action space of robots is enormously wide, raising the question of whether a scaling law exists and when it can arise for robots. II-B LLM/VLM Based Robotic Operation Thanks to access to big data, LLMs have achieved a form of general natural language question answering and have acquired substantial human-like understanding. Some might argue that LLMs have learned a mode of thinking similar to humans, while others insist that LLMs merely predict the distribution of the next token and essentially learn statistical patterns from data. The fact remains that LLMs can interpret and respond to general and intuitive questions. Moreover, they are increasingly capable of addressing domain-specific queries and drawing on broad knowledge of physics, mathematics, and other disciplines. The introduction of chain-of-thought reasoning has further enabled LLMs to follow human-preferred step-by-step reasoning processes in problem solving [ 21 , 24 ] . These advances have greatly enhanced the capabilities of LLMs, making them valuable for supporting robotic tasks such as task understanding, planning, and reasoning. VLA models integrate visual understanding, language reasoning, and action generation to achieve action-level reasoning [ 27 , 13 , 15 ] . However, end-to-end training requires massive datasets as we discussed in Section II-A . Moreover, the training also introduces uncertainty at every stage, which spans from visual perception to linguistic reasoning and to final action generation. To address this, we argue for decoupling the visual component: assuming the robot already has sufficiently accurate perceptual information via computer vision algorithms, and the LLMs are asked to focus only on action reasoning. This approach significantly reduces data requirements while also leveraging the wealth of existing research in computer vision. For example, the ReKep series [ 11 , 16 ] use vision-language models to identify keypoints for robotic manipulation, which significantly reduces the reliance on hand-coded programs and does not require training. Such approaches also constrain the robot’s exploration space. The distinction of our work from ReKep [ 11 ] is that while ReKep emphasizes 2D keypoint detection and corresponding actions, our method enables direct 3D spatial reasoning leveraging physical information. We therefore term it physical reasoning. This allows robots to exploit richer physical cues and directly operate in SE(3) to produce phase‑conditioned action proposals in 3D, avoiding limitations such as occlusions and the lack of precision inherent in 2D keypoint inputs. In addition, for complex multi-step tasks, there are emerging multi-agent frameworks, such as CAMEL [ 14 ] for role‑playing agents and AutoGen [ 22 ] for multi‑agent conversations, that enable the coordination of specialized agents to debate, verify, or decompose tasks. Embodied agents such as Voyager [ 20 ] demonstrate open‑ended skill acquisition with iterative prompting and a growing skill library. These patterns inform our design of specialized robotics agents, task decomposition, physics checking, and pose planning, while collaborating over a shared and updated 3D environment state. Our method employs multiple LLM calls, where each call is assigned specific roles to decompose complex problems, enabling end