Title: Expanding LLM Agent Boundaries with Strategy-Guided Exploration

Abstract: Reinforcement learning (RL) has demonstrated notable success in post-training large language models (LLMs) as agents for tasks such as computer use, tool calling, and coding. However, exploration remains a central challenge in RL for LLM agents, especially as they operate in language-action spaces with complex observations and sparse outcome rewards. In this work, we address exploration for LLM agents by leveraging the ability of LLMs to plan and reason in language about the environment to shift exploration from low-level actions to higher-level language strategies. We thus propose Strategy-Guided Exploration (SGE), which first generates a concise natural-language strategy that describes what to do to make progress toward the goal, and then generates environment actions conditioned on that strategy. By exploring in the space of strategies rather than the space of actions, SGE induces structured and diverse exploration that targets different environment outcomes. To increase strategy diversity during RL, SGE introduces mixed-temperature sampling, which explores diverse strategies in parallel, along with a strategy reflection process that grounds strategy generation on the outcomes of previous strategies in the environment. Across UI interaction, tool-calling, coding, and embodied agent environments, SGE consistently outperforms exploration-focused RL baselines, improving both learning efficiency and final performance. We show that SGE enables the agent to learn to solve tasks too difficult for the base model.

Body: Expanding LLM Agent Boundaries with Strategy-Guided Exploration Report GitHub Issue × Title: Content selection saved. Describe the issue below: Description: Submit without GitHub Submit in GitHub Back to arXiv Why HTML? Report Issue Back to Abstract Download PDF Abstract 1 Introduction 2 Related Work 3 Approach 3.1 Preliminaries 3.2 Strategy-Guided Exploration 3.3 RL Details 4 Experiments 4.1 Environments 4.2 Baselines 4.3 Empirical Comparison to Baselines 4.4 Analysis 5 Conclusion and Limitations References A Implementation Details A.1 Prompts A.2 Further SGE Details A.3 Hyperparameters A.4 Baseline Details B Additional Results C Environment Details C.1 Coding C.2 Android World C.3 Language Rearrangement (LangR) C.4 AppWorld License: arXiv.org perpetual non-exclusive license arXiv:2603.02045v1[cs.LG] 02 Mar 2026 Expanding LLM Agent Boundaries with Strategy-Guided Exploration Andrew Szot Michael Kirchhof Omar Attia Alexander Toshev Apple ( March 2, 2026 ) Abstract Reinforcement learning (RL) has demonstrated notable success in post-training large language models (LLMs) as agents for tasks such as computer use, tool calling, and coding. However, exploration remains a central challenge in RL for LLM agents, especially as they operate in language-action spaces with complex observations and sparse outcome rewards. In this work, we address exploration for LLM agents by leveraging the ability of LLMs to plan and reason in language about the environment to shift exploration from low-level actions to higher-level language strategies. We thus propose Strategy-Guided Exploration (SGE), which first generates a concise natural-language strategy that describes what to do to make progress toward the goal, and then generates environment actions conditioned on that strategy. By exploring in the space of strategies rather than the space of actions, SGE induces structured and diverse exploration that targets different environment outcomes. To increase strategy diversity during RL, SGE introduces mixed-temperature sampling, which explores diverse strategies in parallel, along with a strategy reflection process that grounds strategy generation on the outcomes of previous strategies in the environment. Across UI interaction, tool-calling, coding, and embodied agent environments, SGE consistently outperforms exploration-focused RL baselines, improving both learning efficiency and final performance. We show that SGE enables the agent to learn to solve tasks too difficult for the base model. \metadata [Correspondence] Andrew Szot: a_szot@apple.com ; Alexander Toshev: toshev@apple.com 1 Introduction Large language models (LLMs) are a promising foundation for building agents across a wide range of downstream tasks such as computer use ( cua2025 ) , coding ( claudecode ) , tool usage ( o3o4cite ) , and robotics ( kim2024openvla ) . A key driver of progress in LLM agents is reinforcement learning (RL), which trains LLMs to autonomously act to solve tasks in external environments. RL has shown the ability to teach LLMs to reason, self-correct, and interact with complex environments using simple, easy-to-specify rewards without human feedback ( guo2025deepseek ) . Exploration is a central challenge in training LLM agents with RL. This challenge is amplified by sparse outcome rewards, which reward the agent only when it achieves the desired goal. In domains such as video game playing ( silver2017mastering ) or navigation ( wijmans2019dd ) , RL can train superhuman policies starting from a base policy that performs poorly. In contrast, RL for LLM agents operates in complex language action spaces such as code outputs or tool calls, and is initialized from a pretrained model that induces a concentrated policy over likely outputs. As a result, RL for LLM agents predominantly samples from and refines behaviors already supported by the base model, limiting the agent’s ability to discover new successful trajectories. Consistent with this, empirical evidence from prior work in non-agentic reasoning domains demonstrates that RL post-training struggles to learn new tasks and instead refines outputs to high-reward trajectories the model is already capable of generating ( wu2025invisible ; yue2025does ) . To improve exploration in RL training for LLM agents, we introduce Strategy-Guided Exploration (SGE), which expands agent capabilities by exploring new tasks not solvable by the base model. SGE leverages the ability of LLMs to plan and reason in natural language about the agent’s environment. Instead of treating exploration as sampling environment actions, SGE first generates a language “strategy" and then produces the environment action conditioned on that strategy. The strategy is a concise and specific natural language description of what to do to make progress toward the goal. We show that with SGE, exploring in the space of strategies is easier than exploring in the space of actions, and that diverse strategies lead to better exploration in the environment, which increases the likelihood of success. Since strategies are high-level language descriptions of intended outcomes, the LLM can use its reasoning abilities to generate many distinct strategies. Conditioning on these strategies then guides the LLM to produce action sequences consistent with the strategy that explore different environment outcomes. SGE introduces several techniques to generate diverse strategies during RL training to improve exploration. SGE does more than simply prompt the LLM agent to first produce a strategy, and introduces techniques to maximize strategy diversity throughout training. The first component of SGE is mixed-temperature sampling, which samples the strategy at a higher temperature than the rest of the token sequence. Higher temperature for action sampling often produces different actions that achieve the same environment outcome, such as clicking the same UI element at different positions. In contrast, increasing temperature in the higher-level strategy language space generates strategies that correspond to different outcomes. The second component of SGE is strategy reflection, where the model reflects on successful and failed strategies from earlier in RL training. This reflection helps ground strategy generation in the details of the environment dynamics and further diversify strategies from previous attempts. See Figure ˜ 1 for an overview of the SGE method. Figure 1 : Overview of Strategy-Guided Exploration (SGE). SGE improves reinforcement learning (RL) training on hard agentic tasks for which the base model fails, even after many attempts (left of figure). SGE addresses this by having the LLM policy output a language “strategy” and then conditioning the action generation on this strategy. The reasoning capabilities of the LLM enable it to output diverse strategies through the techniques of: (1) mixed-temperature sampling, where strategy tokens are sampled with higher temperature than remaining tokens, and (2) strategy reflection, where strategies are generated to be distinct from other strategies executed earlier in RL training. This enables SGE to explore to solve hard tasks that the base model is not capable of succeeding in (right of figure). Our experiments show that SGE solves challenging tasks during RL training that the base model cannot solve even after many attempts across the multi-step agentic environments of coding ( xia2025leetcodedataset ) , UI control ( rawles2024androidworld ) , tool-calling ( trivedi2024appworld ) , and embodied agents ( szot2023large ) . SGE also outperforms exploration-focused RL baselines, achieving higher final performance and better learning efficiency. For example, in the multi-turn coding environment, the starting LLM solves 69% of the problems at least once out of 2048 attempts (pass@2048=0.69). The best performing RL baseline with a 64% final success rate (pass@1=0.64) is unable to surpass this ceiling in task pass rate as it attains no learning signal for the remaining difficult problems. SGE, capable of exploring to solve harder problems, achieves a 73% success rate. These training gains then translate to better generalization on unseen tasks. We demonstrate the broad applicability of SGE by showing consistent improvements with SGE across four diverse environments involving different observation and action spaces. We also ablate the SGE components of mixed-temperature sampling and strategy reflection, along with analyzing the impact of SGE across LLM size. We qualitatively analyze how the LLM is able to generate and use diverse strategies to solve new tasks that are unsolvable by the base model. Overall, our experiments show how SGE uses exploration to unlock scaling RL training to expand agentic capabilities on difficult tasks. 2 Related Work Exploration is a long-standing central challenge of RL. Simple forms of exploration based on action sampling struggle in sparse-reward or long-horizon problems that require complex exploration behaviors ( mnih2013playing ; sutton2018reinforcement ) . To address these shortcomings, some works model the uncertainty around the dynamics or state of the environment and use this as a learning signal to explore the environment ( burda2018exploration ; pathakicml17curiosity ) . Other methods introduce temporally extended exploration without explicit uncertainty estimation ( osband16 ; plappert2017parameter ; bellemare2016unifying ; martin2017count ; tang2017exploration ) . Hierarchical RL ( sutton1999between ; nachum2018near ) and options learning ( bacon2017option ) seek to better handle exploration over long-horizon tasks. Like these works, SGE also focuses on complex exploration strategies but leverages the strengths of LLMs to do so. Other works use language for hierarchical control, but do so for communication between planner and control policies ( belkhale2024rt ) , not to improve exploration for solving harder tasks as in SGE. Exploration in RL is especially important for LLM-based policies as they typically operate in complex language action spaces, such as open-ended code generation, and are rewarded for achieving sparse outcomes, such as calling a sequence of tools that accomplishes a goal. Prior work focusing on non-agentic reasoning tasks suggests that RL for LLM post-training primarily refines existing abilities of the base LLM instead of teaching the LLM to solve new problems that are unsolvable by the base model ( yue2025does ; wu2025invisible ) . We show that the improved exploration from SGE helps exceed these limits in agentic tasks. Works attempt to maintain high output entropy throughout training; however, these techniques are more designed to help training stability and less to promote exploration ( cui2025entropy ; wang2025beyond ) . Other works directly train for policy diversity using a “pass@ k k ” reward during training, where the model is rewarded if any attempt out of k k attempts succeeds ( chen2025pass ; tang2025optimizing ) . These methods also try to prevent policy collapse, but still require at least one of the k k attempts to succeed under the base model to obtain a learning signal. Unlike these works, our method incentivizes exploration in problems where the base model achieves minimal starting pass@ k k . Other methods introduce exploration-specific techniques to LLM RL training. gao2025navigate uses the random network distillation framework ( burda2018exploration ) to reward novel token sequences while cheng2025reasoning directly rewards the policy entropy. Our method also incentivizes exploration, but does so through language reasoning, and we demonstrate that it empirically outperforms these added exploration objectives. Furthermore, these works focus on LLM reasoning for math or reasoning problems with a question-and-answer format, while we focus on agentic settings where an LLM agent takes a series of actions to achieve a goal. song2025outcome adds a UCB exploration reward over the predicted final answer, but we focus on action spaces with an unbounded number of action possibilities. li2025jointly uses a pretrained diversity classifier score as a reward, which we do not have in our multi-step agentic setting. Other works use the pretrained knowledge of LLMs to provide policy feedback ( klissarov2023motif ) , which is orthogonal to how SGE uses the LLM to reason over strategies for better exploration in sparse reward settings. Works also use LLMs to guide exploration in other non-LLM policies ( hao2025llm ; tam2022semantic ) , whereas we focus on exploration in a single end-to-end LLM agent. Other works on post-training LLMs for reasoning also introduce language abstractions or plans of reasoning steps or solutions. qu2025rlad uses distillation to first output a “reasoning abstraction", similar to a strategy in SGE. However, SGE does not use a teacher model and introduces diversity-maximizing techniques in RL such as mixed-temperature sampling and strategy reflection. wu2025mode also requires multiple expert models to generate different modes and focuses on distillation rather than online RL, like in SGE. chen2025nudging introduces a “hint" to guide policy responses, but this hint is generated from the ground truth answer. Unlike these works, SGE operates in multi-step agentic settings where only the desired final outcome is specified, such as passing a set of tests, and the ground truth correct action response is unknown. 3 Approach 3.1 Preliminaries We formalize the agentic tasks we focus on as Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs) with goal space 𝒢 \mathcal{G} , observation space 𝒪 \mathcal{O} , action space 𝒜 \mathcal{A} , environment transition function 𝒯 \mathcal{T} , and a reward model R R . For brevity, we omit other elements of the MDP. In the settings we study, 𝒢 \mathcal{G} is a natural language description of the goal, 𝒪 \mathcal{O} is a textual or visual input, and 𝒴 \mathcal{Y} is the space of any textual outputs by the LLM. The environments we consider involve actions like tool-calling and coding, thus the action space 𝒜 ⊂ 𝒴 \mathcal{A}\subset\mathcal{Y} is expressed as natural language. The reward model R R is a sparse reward assigned at the end of the episode for successfully completing the task. We consider an LLM policy π : 𝒢 × 𝒪 → 𝒴 × 𝒜 \pi:\mathcal{G}\times\mathcal{O}\rightarrow\mathcal{Y}\times\mathcal{A} with the goal of maximizing the POMDP cumulative reward. At the episode start, the LLM receives a goal g ∼ 𝒢 g\sim\mathcal{G} and starting observation o 1 ∈ 𝒪 o_{1}\in\mathcal{O} . First, the LLM policy samples an intermediate reasoning trace (chain of thought) y 1 ∼ π ( ⋅ ∣ g , o 1 ) y_{1}\sim\pi(\cdot\mid g,o_{1}) and then produces the action a 1 ∼ π ( ⋅ ∣ g , o 1 , y 1 ) a_{1}\sim\pi(\cdot\mid g,o_{1},y_{1}) which is executed in the environment and returns the next observation o 2 = 𝒯 ​ ( o 1 , a 1 ) o_{2}=\mathcal{T}(o_{1},a_{1}) . This processes repeats to sample a trajectory o 1 , y 1 , a 1 , o 